BROILER

Management Handbook

2025

START

PREFACE

USING THIS HANDBOOK

CONTENTS

This Handbook

Use this button to visit
the contents pages

The purpose of this handbook is to help Aviagen® customers optimize performance of their
broiler stock. It is not intended to provide definitive information on every aspect of broiler
management, but to draw attention to important issues, which if overlooked or inadequately
addressed, could negatively impact flock performance. The management techniques contained
within this handbook have the objectives of achieving good flock health and welfare, and
obtaining optimal flock performance both live and through processing.
The information presented is a combination of data derived from internal research trials, published scientific
knowledge, and the expertise, practical skills and experience of the Aviagen Technical Transfer, Technical Service
and Global Technical Operations teams. However, the guidance within this handbook cannot wholly protect against
performance variations that may occur for a wide variety of reasons. Aviagen, therefore, accepts no ultimate liability
for the consequences of using this information to manage broiler stock.

Customer Services
For further information, please contact your local Ross® representative
or visit the website at www.aviagen.com.

Buttons will link to
external sources
throughout

Use the back
arrow to return to
the previous page

2

Use the forward
arrow to move to
the next page

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

PREFACE

USING THIS HANDBOOK

CONTENTS

Using This Handbook
Finding a Topic
The Table of Contents gives the title and page number of each section and subsection. In the interactive handbook,
the sections and subsections are hyperlinked for easy access.
The interactive handbook features the ability to find information quickly with hyperlinked references to similar topics
that are discussed across multiple sections.
Appendices and an alphabetical Keyword Index are provided at the end of the handbook.
Key Points and Useful Information

Look for this symbol to find Key Points that emphasize important aspects of husbandry and critical

KEY
POINTS
procedures.

Look for this symbol to find suggestions for Other Useful Information on specific topics in this

OTHER
USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE
handbook.

The document QR code is a direct link to the publication in the Info Center of the Aviagen website,
Look for
this symbol
for direct
to publications
in the Info
Center
the Aviagen
website,
unless
otherwise
stated.
In thelinks
printed
handbook, videos
will also
be of
represented
with
QR codes.
unlessthe
otherwise
Scan
code to stated.
link directly to short videos detailing management advice.

Look for this symbol to view short management videos.

Supplements to This Handbook
Supplements to this handbook contain Performance Objectives, that can be achieved with good management,
as well as nutritional, environmental, and health control. Nutrition Specifications and a Nutrition Supplement are
also available. All management information can be found online at www.aviagen.com, by contacting your local Ross
representative, or by emailing info@aviagen.com.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

3

CONTENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CONTENTS
Choose any row to
jump to the page
in the document

Contents
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION
Balanced Breeding

7

Economic and Commercial Issues

8

Broiler Production

9

Stockmanship

11

Practical Stockmanship

12

The Relationship Between Stockmanship and Bird Welfare

15

Key Management Timetable

16

SECTION 2: CHICK MANAGEMENT
Chick Quality and Broiler Performance		

20

Planning

20

Chick Quality

21

SECTIONS

Chick Management

22

4-6

Farm Preparation

22

Brooding Setup

26

Chick Placement

29

Environmental Control

29

Monitoring Chick Behavior

33

Chick Start Assessment

34

SECTION 3: MONITORING LIVE WEIGHT AND UNIFORMITY OF PERFORMANCE
Predictability of Live Weight

37

Manual Weighing

38

Bulk Bird Weighing

38

Individual Bird Weighing

39

Automatic Weighing Systems

39

Inconsistent Weight Data

40

Flock CV%/Uniformity%

40

Separate-Sex Growing

42

SECTION 4: PRE-PROCESSING MANAGEMENT
Preparation for Catching

4

43

Light

43

Feed Withdrawal

43

Water

44

Pharmaceuticals

44

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

CONTENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CONTENTS
Choose any row to
jump to the page
in the document

Catching

45

Ventilation

45

Thinning/Partial Depletion

45

Pre-catch

46

Catch

47

Transport

49

Delivery

49

SECTION 5: PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER
Broiler Nutrition

SECTIONS

1-4

51

Supply of Nutrients

51

Feeding Program

52

Feed Form and Physical Quality

53

Whole-Grain Feeding

55

Feeding Under High Environmental Temperatures

56

Drinking and Feeding Systems

SECTIONS

6-7

57

Drinking Systems

57

Feeding Systems

61

SECTION 6: ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS
Housing

63

Farm Location and Design

63

House Design

65

Ventilation

67

Air

68

Housing and Ventilation Systems

68

Open-Sided/Naturally-Ventilated Housing

68

Closed-/Controlled-Environment Housing

70

Minimum Ventilation

72

Transitional Ventilation

78

Tunnel Ventilation

79

Evaporative Cooling Systems

83

Bird Heat Loss

86

Lighting

88

Vision Difference in Poultry

88

Considerations for Lighting Management

89

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

5

CONTENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CONTENTS
Choose any row to
jump to the page
in the document

Litter Management

95

Nutritional Strategies to Manage Litter Quality

97

Reuse of Litter

97

Perch Provisions for Broilers

98

Stocking Density

99

SECTION 7: HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

SECTIONS

4-6

Bird Health and Biosecurity

102

Hygiene Management

102

Biosecurity

102

Cleaning and Disinfection

105

Water Quality

108

Dead Bird Disposal		

110

Disease Control		

111

Vaccination

111

Salmonella and Feed Hygiene

113

Antibiotics

113

Disease Investigation

114

Disease Recognition

117

APPENDICES
Appendix 1 – Production Records

119

Appendix 2 – Useful Management Information

121

Appendix 3 – Conversion Tables

123

Appendix 4 – Key Performance Parameters

126

Appendix 5 – Feather Sexing

128

Appendix 6 – Problem Solving

129

Appendix 7 – Ventilation Rates and Calculations

132

Appendix 8 – Calculation for Stocking Density

136

KEYWORD INDEX
Keyword Index

6

137

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

Section 1: Introduction
Balanced Breeding
Aviagen produces a wide range of breeds suitable for different sectors of the broiler market. This allows for the
selection of a bird that best meets the needs of a particular operation. All Aviagen chickens are selected through
a balanced breeding program for a wide range of traits that encompass efficiency, production, welfare, and robustness
characteristics. This balanced breeding approach ensures that the birds are capable of performing to the highest
standards in a wide variety of environments and management conditions. Characteristics of commercial importance
such as growth rate, feed conversion ratio (FCR), livability, meat yield, and meat quality are consistently improved,
with continued genetic advances also being made in bird welfare, leg health, cardiovascular fitness, and robustness.
Each year, the genetic potential of the Ross bird improves. To unlock this improved performance, the broiler stockman
must ensure that each of the factors shown in Figure 1.1 is given full attention. All of these aspects of bird management
are interdependent; if any one element is suboptimal, then broiler performance will be compromised.
Figure 1.1
Factors affecting broiler growth and quality.

Health
Chick Quality

Feed Supply

Bird Welfare

Nutrition

Lighting

Temperature

Stocking Density

Water Supply

Ventilation

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Vaccination Status

7

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

Aviagen’s Technical Transfer, Technical Service and
Global Technical Operations teams have designed this
handbook to guide the broiler stockman through every
aspect of bird management to achieve optimal animal
welfare with the best economic performance. The guide
is written with the following principles in mind:
Consideration of bird welfare at all times.
Understanding the elements of the production chain
and the transition phases between them.
Attention to the quality of the end product throughout
the entire process.
The need for observation of changes in bird behavior
and in their environment.
Appropriate management responses to the continually
changing requirements of the bird.

The Ross bird is constantly changing each year as its
genetic potential improves. Every farm that the bird is
grown on is a unique environment with different inputs.
Therefore, to ensure optimal performance and achieve
success, the broiler stockman must understand the
birds' needs and apply responsive management to their
environment to meet those needs as outlined by this
handbook.

Economic and Commercial Issues
Economic and commercial issues continue to influence
the way broilers are managed, including:
An increasing demand across the industry for high
animal welfare, product quality, and food safety.
The need for flocks of broilers that can be grown to
ever more predictable and predefined specifications.

Broiler production is only one part of an integrated
production chain (Figure 1.2) and therefore should
not be considered in isolation. Making changes in any
one part of the chain is likely to have downstream
consequences for broiler production and processing
performance, which may impact biological and/or
financial performance. For example, analyses of
customer broiler data have consistently shown that
increasing stocking density or reducing the time between
flocks results in lower average daily gain and worsened
FCR. Thus, while it may appear to be financially attractive
to increase the number of birds going through the
production system, the financial impact of such changes
needs to be properly evaluated, taking into account
reduced growth, more variable performance, higher feed
costs, and lower meat yields at the processing plant.
Successful broiler management is crucial for producing
birds that meet the requirements of the processing plant,
ensuring customer satisfaction. A processing plant's
requirements will differ depending on the market they
supply. They will often have specifications for weight
and variation, as well as bird quality. Deviation from
these specifications incurs costs, and a cost-benefit
approach will dictate what management practices are
most appropriate for the broiler stockman. For example,
separate-sex growing and close monitoring of bird
growth and uniformity both give benefits at processing
but add costs to production.
Good broiler welfare drives good commercial performance.
Optimal management of birds within a flock will promote
a more uniform flock and, therefore, ease of predicting
live weight at processing. They will more closely and
consistently meet target processing weights and
subsequent product weight specifications, have good
processing yields, and are less likely to be downgraded
in the processing plant.

A requirement to minimize variability within flocks and
hence variability at processing.
An increasing demand for minimizing the environmental
impact of broiler production.
Full utilization of the genetic potential available in the
bird for FCR, growth rate, and meat yield.
Minimization of health and welfare issues such as
ascites and leg weaknesses.
Maximization of saleable carcass.

8

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

Broiler Production
The broiler growing phase is one part of the integrated total meat production process, which includes parent stock
farms, transport, hatcheries, broiler farms, feed mills, processors, retailers, and consumers.
Figure 1.2
Producing quality broiler meat — the total process.

Location

Operation

Objective

Parent Stock Management
PARENT
STOCK
FARM

Egg Collection
Egg Storage

Egg Reception
Incubation

HATCHERY

Hatching

To maintain chick quality.

Growth Management
Depletion
Cleanout

To develop immune function.
To allow optimum development of
skeleton and cardiovascular system.
To optimize carcass quality.
To maximize bird welfare.

Processing

KEY PRODUCTION
MANAGEMENT PHASES

Brooding

PROCESSING
PLANT

To produce high-quality chicks.

To develop good feeding behavior.

Disinfection
BROILER
FARM

To produce high-quality and fertile eggs.

To maximize yield and quality of end product.

Retail

The objective of the broiler stockman is to achieve the required flock performance in terms of bird welfare, live weight,
FCR, uniformity, and meat yield within the unique economic constraints of their operation. Each year, as genetic progress
continues, the modern broiler reaches its desired processing weight sooner, and so it is crucial that the stockman
provides the correct housing, environment, and management from placement throughout the entire growing period.
Broiler production is a sequential process, with ultimate performance being dependent on each stage being completed
successfully. For maximum performance to be attained, each stage must be assessed critically, and improvements must
be made when required. Given the relatively short time from hatch to processing, it is difficult to reverse any management
issues. Therefore, every effort must be made to meet the birds' biological needs every day during each growth phase.
It's very important to collect data, analyze it, and then use it to optimize management and performance.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

9

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

The complexity of broiler production means that stockmen should have a clear understanding of the factors affecting
the whole production process as well as those directly influencing bird management on the farm. Changes may also
be necessary in the hatchery, during transport, and in the processing plant. Within broiler production, there are several
stages of development as the bird moves from egg to farm and then to the processing plant. There is a transition
phase between each stage of the production process. Transitions can be challenging for the birds and must be
managed to maintain bird welfare. The key transitions for the broiler producer are:
Chick hatching.
Take-off, storage, and transportation of the chick.
Development of good feeding behavior in the young chick.
Changeover from supplementary feeding and drinking systems to the main systems.
Ration changes to structural or nutritional composition.
Catching and transport of the broiler at depletion.

KEY POINTS
On-farm broiler production is one stage in the middle of a complex process.
All of these stages and the transitions between them must be carefully considered and managed to produce top-quality birds.
Attention to detail is crucial.

10

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

Stockmanship
The importance of stockmanship for broiler welfare, performance, and profitability must not be
underestimated. A good stockman will be able to identify and respond to problems quickly.
The stockman must apply and interpret the best-practice recommendations given in this handbook and use them in
combination with their own professional competence, practical knowledge, skills, and ability to meet the birds’ needs.
The stockman must be constantly in tune with and aware of all the birds in the flock, their environment, and the
data related to both. To do this, the birds’ behavioral characteristics and the conditions within the poultry house must
be closely observed.
This monitoring is commonly referred to as “stock sense” and is a continuous process that uses all the stockman’s
senses (Figure 1.3). A good stockman must also be empathetic and dedicated, have a good knowledge and skill
base, pay attention to detail, and be patient.
Figure 1.3
Stockmanship — using the senses to monitor the flock.

Sight

Observe behaviors such
as bird distribution in the
house and number of birds
feeding, drinking, and
resting. Observe the
environment such as dust
in the air and litter quality.
Observe bird health and
demeanor such as posture,
alertness, eyes, and gait.

Smell

Keep notice of smells in
the environment such as
NH3 level. Is the air stale
or stuffy?

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Hearing

Listen to the birds’ vocalization,
breathing, and respiratory
sounds. Listen to the
mechanical sounds of fan
bearings and feed augers.

Feel

Handle the birds to assess
crop fill and check the birds’
general condition. Take notice
of air movement across your
skin—is there a draft? What
does the temperature of the
house feel like?

11

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

Practical Stockmanship
The body-weight and FCR targets at a given age are usually the same across flocks, but each individual flock will
have slightly different management requirements to achieve those targets. To understand the individual management
requirements of a flock and be able to respond to each flock appropriately, the stockman must know and also sense
what is normal for the flock.
The stockman has an important role to play in maintaining the welfare, health, and performance of a flock. If only farm
records (growth, feed consumption, etc.) are monitored, important signals from the birds and their environment will
be missed. Often, the first signs of a problem or inadequacy in the environment are subtle changes in bird behavior.
By understanding what is normal for a flock, any changes in behavior or the development of abnormal behavior for
that flock can be quickly identified. Using all the senses, the stockman must build up an awareness of the environment
and an understanding of the normal behavioral characteristics of the flock.
This information should be continuously analyzed, along with farm records, the stockman’s experience and knowledge,
and the current environmental conditions, to quickly identify and correct any changes or deficiencies in the birds’
condition and/or environment.
The flock environment and behavior should be observed at various times of the day by the same person. This
observation should be carried out whenever day-to-day management tasks in the house are completed. Additionally,
it is crucial to conduct specific inspections solely focused on monitoring flock behavior.
Before entering the house, the time and ambient climatic conditions should be noted. This will help determine how the
fans, heaters, cool cells, and inlets should be operating when compared to the system’s set points.
Upon entry to the house, gently knock on and gradually open the door and ask yourself the following question:
Does the door into the house open with a slight resistance, no resistance, or high resistance?

The answer to this question will indicate the air pressure within the house and reflect the ventilation settings
(e.g., inlet openings and fan operation).

12

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

Slowly enter the house and stop until the birds become accustomed to your presence. During this time,
continuously use all your senses to assess the flock condition: LOOK, LISTEN, SMELL, AND FEEL (Figure 1.4).
Figure 1.4
Using the senses to assess flock condition.

LISTEN TO:

The birds
Are the birds snicking/sneezing? Are their vocalizations
appropriate for their age? How do the birds sound
compared to previous visits? Is it a vaccination response
or is it related to a dusty, poor environment? Often,
listening to the birds is best done in the evening when the
noise level is reduced.
The feeders
Are the mechanical augers or chains running
constantly and smoothly? Has the feed bridged
in the feed bin?
The fans
Are the fan bearings noisy? Do fan belts sound loose?
Routine maintenance can prevent environmental
issues related to suboptimal air quality.

FEEL:

The air
How does the air feel on your face? Is it stuffy (humid), cold, or
hot? Is there fast air speed or no air movement? These, either
in combination or solely, can indicate specific environmental
issues, such as insufficient minimum ventilation.
The feed physical quality
Is the feed very dusty? Do the pellets break down very easily
in the hand and in the feeder?
The litter condition
Pick up and feel the condition of the litter. If the litter stays
together after compressing (does not spring apart), it
indicates excessive moisture, which may suggest ventilation
inadequacies. If the litter is dry, it will remain friable and fall
apart after compressing.

SMELL:

The feed
What does the feed smell like?
Does it smell fresh or musty?
The environment
What does the environment
smell like? Can you smell NH­3?
LOOK AT:
Bird distribution
Are specific areas of the house being avoided, suggesting
an environmental issue (drafty, cold, hot, or unevenly lit)?
Bird respiration
Are the birds panting? Is the panting specific to one area
of the house, suggesting an air flow or temperature issue?
Bird behavior
Drinking, feeding, and resting—normally, broilers will
be split evenly between these three behaviors.
Bird health
Do the birds look healthy upon visual observation?
Are there signs of injury or damage to feather cover?
Fans
Are the inlets correctly positioned? Are the heaters
running? Do the set points need adjustment?

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Cooling pads
Depending on the set points, is the pad area wet,
dry, or a combination? Is the water pump functioning
and the water being distributed evenly on the pads?
Litter condition
Are areas capping due to leaking drinkers or excess water
from cool cells? Is cold air entering the house and falling
to the floor? Are droppings wet and loose or dry and solid?
Are there signs of feed particles present in the droppings?
Feeders and drinkers
Are they the correct height? Is there feed in the feeders?
Are the drinkers leaking? What is the feed quality like?
Is there feed spillage?
Lighting
Are there any dark spots in the house? Are the lights
at the correct intensity? Is the timer correct and working?

13

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

After the initial entry into the house and observation of the flock and the environment, slowly walk the entire house,
assessing the points in Figure 1.5. Walking the entire house is important to ensure that there is minimal variation in
the environment and bird behavior throughout the house. When walking through the house, get down to bird level and
pick up any birds that do not move away. Are they sick or injured? How many birds are affected? Assess the way the
flock moves in front of and behind you. Do the birds move back to fill the space created by walking through the flock?
Periodically stop to handle and assess individual birds for the following:
Figure 1.5
Bird assessment.

General demeanor
and alertness

Eyes
Should be clear with
no signs of irritation.
Skin
Should be unblemished
with no scratches.

Beak and tongue
Should have no nasal discharge (or
feed sticking to beak), and no signs of
tongue discoloration or mouth lesions.

Feathering
Should be clean with
no feathers sticking out.

Crop
Are they feeding?
Does the crop contain
litter? Is the crop
very hard or soft?
This will indicate
the water availability.

Vent
Should be clean with no
signs of loose droppings.

Breast
Should be unblemished
with no blisters.

Feet
Footpads should be clean
with no irritation markings.

Leg health
Hocks should be clean
with no irritation marks.

These observations will help build a picture for each individual flock/house.
Remember, no two flocks or houses are the same!

Compare this stock sense information with actual farm records. Are the birds on target weight for age? If there are any
irregularities, they must be investigated and an action plan should be developed to address any issues that occur.

14

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

The Relationship Between Stockmanship and Bird Welfare
Stock sense, combined with the stockman’s knowledge, experience, and skills in husbandry, will produce a well-rounded
stockman who will also have personal qualities such as patience, dedication, and empathy when working with the birds.
The implementation of the “Three Essentials of Stockmanship” (Figure 1.6) will not only bring the birds as close as
possible to the ideal state of “The Five Freedoms of Animal Welfare,” it will strongly influence efficiency and profitability.
Figure 1.6
Three Essentials of Stockmanship.
(Source: adapted from Animal Welfare Committee [AWC] definition of the “ideal state to strive for”).

Knowledge of
animal husbandry.

Sound knowledge of the biology
and husbandry of farm animals,
including how their needs
may be best provided for
in all circumstances.

Skills in animal
husbandry.

Demonstratable skills in
observation, handling, care,
and treatment of animals,
as well as problem detection
and resolution.

Personal qualities.
Affinity and empathy with
animals, dedication, and
patience.

BIRD HANDLING
Animal welfare and safety are of utmost importance at all times. It is critical that people handling birds are
experienced and trained in the correct techniques that are appropriate for the purpose, age, and sex of the bird.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

15

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

Key Management Timetable
The critical age objectives for broilers are summarized in the table below.
Age (days)

Action

Before chick
delivery

Clean and disinfect all housing and equipment and verify the effectiveness of biosecurity operations.
Obtain day-old chick information from the hatchery, including chick weight, vaccination record, parent
stock age, and health status, etc.
Preheat the house and establish minimum ventilation. Temperature and relative humidity (RH) should
be stabilized for at least 24 hours prior to chick delivery.
Air temperature: 30°C (86.0°F) for whole house brooding and 32°C (89.6°F) at the edge of the brooder
for spot brooding.
RH: 60–70%.
Floor temperature: 28–30°C (82.4–86.0°F) prior to litter distribution.
Litter temperature: 28–32°C (82.4–89.6°F).

Complete house set-up:
Automated and supplementary feeders and drinkers must be in place and filled immediately prior to
chick placement.
Flush water lines prior to chick arrival. The water supplied to the chicks should be approximately
18–21°C (64.4–69.8°F).
Evenly spread litter on the floor to a depth of 2–4 cm (0.8–1.6 in).

On chick
arrival

Check and monitor environmental conditions (temperature, RH, and ventilation) to ensure they are correct
for the development of appetite and chick activity.
Ensure a minimum ventilation rate is set to maintain temperature and RH, remove waste gases, and supply fresh
air. Avoid drafts. Actual air speed at floor level for young chicks should be less than 0.15 m/s (29.5 ft/min).
Light intensity must be at a level that promotes feed and water intake (at least 30–40 lux [2.8–3.7 fc] in
whole-house, or 80–100 lux [7.4–9.3 fc] in spot brooding). Light must be uniformly distributed throughout
the brooding area.
Monitor chick behavior 1–2 hours after placement to ensure that environmental conditions are correct and
access to feed and water is adequate.
Individually weigh a sample of chicks (3 boxes or 1% of the house population, whichever is greater) and
calculate average body weight and flock uniformity (coefficient of variation % [CV%]/uniformity%.

0–3

Develop appetite from good brooding practices.
Adjust environmental conditions (temperature, RH, and ventilation) in line with bird behavior and age.
Provide 23 hours of light with a minimum of 30–40 lux (2.8–3.7 fc) and 1 hour of dark (less than 0.4 lux
[0.04 fc]) for the first days after placement, gradually reaching 4–6 hours of darkness by 7 days.
Monitor chick start.
A vent temperature of 39.4–40.5°C (103–105°F) should be achieved. Vent temperature assessment
should be combined with chick behavior assessment.
Assess crop fill during the first 24 hours to determine if chicks have found feed and water.

16

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

Age (days)

Action

4–6

Adjust environmental conditions (temperature, RH, and ventilation rates) in line with bird behavior, weight,
and age.
Transition smoothly to automated feeders by observing bird activity. Once birds are using the automated
feeders, remove feed from the paper and supplementary feeders.
If using a brooding circle or half-house brooding, expand the brooding area gradually to allow birds access to the
whole house area from 7 days of age. It may be necessary in open-sided houses to delay this until 10–12 days.

7–13

Adjust environmental conditions (temperature, RH, and ventilation rates) in line with bird behavior, weight,
and age.
Weigh birds individually at 7 days. Weigh a minimum of 1% or 100 birds (whichever is larger) from each
population. Calculate flock uniformity (CV%/uniformity%). Body weight at 7 days of age should be at a
minimum of 4.5 times that of day-old weight.
Manage the transition from starter to grower feed (around 10–13 days), ensuring there is a smooth transition
between feed rations and without a break in feed supply.
Monitor feed physical quality.
Adjust drinker and feeder heights in line with bird growth.
After 7 days of age, provide a minimum of 4 hours of darkness in one continuous block (or follow local laws
and regulations), preferring to have the lights turning on at the same time each day.
Provide a light intensity of 5–10 lux (0.46–0.93 fc) during the light period. Local laws and regulations for light
intensity must be followed.

14–20

Adjust environmental conditions (temperature, RH, and ventilation rates) in line with bird behavior, weight,
and age.
Bulk weigh a sample of birds at 14 days. A minimum of 1% or 100 birds (whichever is larger) should be
weighed from each population.
Adjust drinker and feeder heights in line with bird growth.

21–27

Adjust environmental conditions (temperature, RH, and ventilation rates) in line with bird behavior, weight,
and age.
Manage the transition from grower to finisher feed (around 25 days), ensuring there is a smooth transition
between feed rations and without a break in feed supply.
Monitor feed physical quality.
Obtain individual body weights at 21 days. A minimum of 1% or 100 birds (whichever is larger) should be
weighed. Calculate flock CV%/uniformity%.
Adjust the drinker and feeder height to be in line with bird growth.

35 to depletion

Adjust environmental conditions (temperature, RH, and ventilation rates) in line with bird behavior, weight,
and age.
Continue to obtain weekly individual body weights. A minimum of 1% or 100 birds (whichever is larger)
should be weighed from each population. Calculate flock uniformity (CV%/uniformity%).
Adjust the drinker and feeder height in line with bird growth.

Pre-processing
management

Provide 23 hours of light and 1 hour of dark for 3 days prior to catching. Reduce the light intensity during catching.
The lighting program must comply with local laws and regulations.
Calculate the feed withdrawal period. Feed should be removed from the birds 8–12 hours before processing.
Reposition feeding equipment.
Maintain access to water.
Ensure catching equipment is clean.
Maintain effective ventilation.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

17

SECTION 1

INTRODUCTION

CONTENTS

Notes

18

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Section 2: Chick Management
Objective

Introduction

To promote the early development of feeding and drinking
behavior and ensure an optimal chick start, maximizing
subsequent bird growth, uniformity, health and welfare,
and final meat quality. Optimal chick management should
achieve a 7-day body weight that is at a minimum of 4.5
times the chick's initial weight at placement.

As chicks move from the hatchery to the broiler house,
their nutrient source changes significantly.

Principles
It's advised to minimize the time between hatching and
placement. Although chicks have a yolk sac for nutrients,
they need quick access to feed and water. Once on the
farm, they should be immediately provided with feed
and water, along with the correct brooding conditions,
which should be managed to meet all their nutritional and
physiological requirements. This promotes early feeding
and drinking behavior development and optimizes gut,
organ, and skeletal development to support body-weight
gain throughout the growing period.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

In the final stages of incubation, and as a hatchling, the
chick receives all of its nutrients from the yolk sac. Once on
the farm, chicks must source their nutrients from the feed
in a sieved crumble form provided in the feeding system,
paper on the floor, and supplemental feeders. The early
environment (temperature, RH, air quality, litter, and access
to feed and water) must make this transition as quick and
easy as possible so that the chicks can establish healthy
feeding and drinking behaviors. As a hatchling, the residual
yolk provides the chick with a protective store of antibodies
and nutrients until a feed source becomes available.
Deficiencies in early flock management or environment will
lead to an uneven flock with depressed growth, reduced
meat quality, and compromised bird welfare.
If early management is adequate and allows the entire
flock to adapt well to the transition from hatchery to broiler
house, 7-day body weight should be a minimum of 4.5
times day-old chick weight. Field data has consistently
shown that a minimum of 4.5 times day-old chick weight,
along with lower 7-day mortality, will improve flock
performance and final meat quality.

Aviagen Brief: Broiler Management for
Birds Grown to Low Kill Weights

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

19

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Chick Quality and Broiler
Performance
Final broiler flock performance and profitability depend
on attention to detail throughout the production process.
This involves good management of healthy parent stock,
optimum hatchery practices, and efficient delivery
of good-quality, uniform chicks.
Chick quality results from the interaction between
parent stock management, parental health and nutrition,
and incubation management. If managed correctly,
a good-quality chick provides a good foundation
for future broiler performance.

Planning
The expected delivery date, time, number, and average
chick weight should be established with the supplier
before the chicks’ arrival. This will ensure that the
appropriate brooding setup is in place and that chicks
can be unloaded and placed as quickly as possible. The
number of chicks placed will depend upon the following:

House dimensions and equipment availability.
Final product specification.

NOTE: In operations where in-hatcher feeding and drinking
equipment or on-farm hatching equipment is installed,
the recommended house environmental conditions
during the brooding period may differ slightly from those
advised in this handbook. The equipment manufacturer's
recommendations should be followed at all times.

Immune status of donor parent flocks
Vaccination of donor parent flocks maximizes maternal
antibody protection in the offspring. It is successful in
protecting broilers against diseases that compromise
performance and welfare (such as infectious bursal
disease [IBD], chicken anemia virus [CAV], and reovirus).
Knowledge of the vaccination program of the donor flock
provides an understanding of the initial health status
of the broiler flock.

Transport system
The transport system (Figure 2.1) should ensure that:
Chicks arrive at the farm promptly so they have access
to feed and water as soon as possible after hatch.
In regions with hot climates or where environmentally
controlled vehicles are unavailable, transport should be
planned so chicks arrive at the farm in the coolest part
of the day.

Local laws and regulations.
Placements of broiler flocks should be planned to ensure
that differences in age and/or immune status of donor
parent flocks are as few as possible. This will minimize
variation in final broiler live weights.

Figure 2.1
Typical controlled-environment chick delivery
vehicles.

Age of donor parent flocks
One donor flock age per house is ideal.
If mixed-age flocks are unavoidable, keep similar parent
flock ages (less than 5 weeks difference) together;
in particular, avoid mixing chicks from parent flocks
under 30 weeks of age with chicks from parent flocks
over 40 weeks of age.
Chicks from young donor flocks (under 30 weeks
of age) or day-old chick weight less than 35 g.
 Ideally, they should be placed in a separate brooding
area within the house and given supplementary feed
and water.
 Before chick arrival, if chicks are from younger donor
flocks, set the environmental temperature 1°C (2°F)
higher than the recommended level in Table 2.4.
After placement, adjust the temperature based on
bird behavior and vent temperatures.

20

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

During transportation
The temperature should be adjusted to ensure that
the chick vent temperature is 39.4–40.5°C (103–105°F).
Note that the required temperature control settings to
achieve this chick vent temperature will vary between
vehicle designs.
Relative Humidity's should be between 50–65%.
Fresh air should be supplied at a minimum of 0.71 cubic
meters (m3) per minute (25 cubic feet [ft3] per minute) per
1,000 chicks. Higher ventilation rates may be required if
the truck is not air-conditioned and ventilation is the only
method available to cool the chicks.
The carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration level should be
less than 3,000 ppm.

Chick Quality
A good-quality chick (Figure 2.2) should be clean after
hatch. It should stand firmly and walk well, be alert and
active, and be free of deformities, with the yolk sac fully
retracted and the navel fully healed. It should vocalize
contentedly.
If a good-quality chick is provided with proper nutrition
and brooding management during the first 7 days,
target live weight for age should be achieved uniformly.
If chick quality is lower than desired, immediate
feedback should be provided to the hatchery on the
precise nature of the problem.
If the conditions during chick holding at the hatchery,
transport to the farm, or brooding are incorrect, a chick
quality problem will be made worse.

Figure 2.2
Day-old chick quality assessment.

Eyes
Should be clear and bright.
Beak
Should be straight and clean.
Down
Should be fluffy, dry,
yellowish, and not sticky.

Legs and Feet
Should be straight,
hydrated, and defect free.

Navel
Should be well healed.

KEY POINTS
Plan placements to minimize physiological and immune differences between chicks. Use single-age donor parent
flocks, if possible.
Maintain high standards of hygiene and biosecurity in the hatchery and during transport.
Hold and transport chicks in conditions that prevent dehydration and optimize chick comfort and welfare.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

21

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Chick Management
Farm Preparation
Biosecurity
Individual sites should be managed for birds of a single age, using the “all-in/all-out” principle. Vaccination and cleaning
programs are easier and more effective on single-age sites, with subsequent benefits for bird health and performance.
Houses, the areas surrounding the houses, and all equipment (including the water and feed systems) must be
thoroughly cleaned and disinfected (Figure 2.3) before the arrival of the litter material and chicks (see checklist in
Table 2.1 and the section on Health and Biosecurity). A recommended hygiene program and efficacy testing
procedure should be in place to ensure that the correct hygiene status is achieved at least 24 hours before the chicks
arrive. Subsequently, management systems should be in place to prevent pathogens from entering the building.
Before entry, all vehicles, equipment, and visitors should be disinfected.
Figure 2.3
Good house cleaning practices. Power washing the house (most effective with hot water; left), testing the
house for bacterial contamination (top right), and disinfecting the exterior with lime (bottom right).

The area surrounding the house should be free from vegetation and designed for easy cleaning (Figure 2.4).
Inside the house, concrete floors are essential for efficient washing, disinfection, and litter management.
Figure 2.4
Houses with a low biosecurity risk showing concrete areas and no vegetation around the immediate
perimeter of the house.

22

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Table 2.1
A checklist of cleaning and disinfection procedures before chick placement.
Area

Action

Yes/No?

Has a visual assessment been carried out to identify any missed areas?
Has cleaning, disinfection, and final fumigation of internal bird areas and
equipment been completed?

Internal Bird Areas

Have the results on the efficacy of the process been received (total viable count
[TVC]/Salmonella)?
Have waste materials from the cleaning and disinfection process been disposed
of appropriately?
Have external building surfaces been cleaned and disinfected?

External Farm Area

Have external concrete walkways been washed with a pressure washer using
hot water?
Has the grass/vegetation within the perimeter of the farm area been cut back to
prevent rodent nesting?

Farm Office/Amenity
Buildings
Rodent Control Program

Have farm office/amenity buildings been washed, cleaned, and disinfected?
Is any waste appropriately disposed of?
Has a check been completed for rodent activity?
Have rodent control stations been re-baited?
Has farm equipment been cleaned and disinfected?

Equipment

Has the feed system been cleaned and disinfected?
Has the water system been cleaned, disinfected, and flushed?
Has spare farm equipment been placed in suitable on-site storage or removed?

Protective Clothing

Has all clothing worn in the bird areas been laundered?
Have rubber boots been washed and disinfected?
Are there boot changes or boot covers available?

Farm Hygiene

Have foot baths been refreshed using an appropriate chemical and dilution rate?
Is access to the farm restricted?
Are appropriate visitor protocols in place (e.g., visitors log book)?

KEY POINTS
Control disease by minimizing the spread of broiler
ages across the farm. An "all-in/all-out" system is best.
Provide chicks with biosecure, clean housing
throughout the life of the flock.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Best Practice in the Broiler House:
Biosecurity

23

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

House Preparation and Layout
Chicks cannot regulate their body temperature until
day 5 and cannot fully regulate it until they are around
12–14 days old. Optimal body temperature to achieve
vent temperatures of 39.4–40.5°C (103–105°F)
must be attained through the provision of ideal
environmental conditions. Floor and litter temperature
at chick placement is as important as air temperature,
so preheating the house is essential.
Houses should be preheated sufficiently to stabilize
house temperature 24 hours before chick arrival.
Temperature and RH should be stabilized at
recommended values to ensure a comfortable
environment for the chicks upon arrival. It may be
necessary to preheat houses for longer than 24 hours
before chick arrival to allow the house's internal structure
to be warmed effectively; this may be due to the time of
year, the length of time between flocks, or if it is the first
flock in a newly built house.
Recommended environmental conditions at placement are:
Air temperature (measured at chick height in the area
where feed and water are positioned):
 30°C (86.0°F) for whole-house brooding.
 32°C (89.6°F) at the edge of the brooder
for spot brooding (refer to Table 2.4)
Floor temperature: 28–30°C (82.4–86.0°F).
Litter temperature: 28–32°C (82.4–89.6°F).
RH: 60–70%.

Temperature and RH should be monitored regularly
to ensure a uniform environment throughout the brooding
area, but chick behavior is the best indicator of correct
environmental conditions (see subsection on Monitoring
Chick Behavior).
Before chick arrival, litter material should be spread evenly
to a depth of 2–4 cm (0.8–1.6 in). Uneven bedding material
can restrict access to feed and water and may lead to a
loss in flock uniformity. Litter depth can be reduced where
litter disposal is an issue. A litter depth of >4 cm (1.6 in)
may be necessary in colder geographical regions to
provide more insulation, even where extended preheating
is in place. Care must be taken that bird movement is not
affected by excessive litter height.
Adequate fresh, clean water must always be available
to all birds, with access points at an appropriate height
(see subsection on Drinking Systems in Section 5).
Ensure drinking space is correct for the drinker type used
(Table 2.3). Water lines should be flushed 1–2 hours
before chick arrival, and any airlocks removed. If using
nipple lines, this can be done by tapping or shaking the
lines until each nipple has a drop of water visible on it.

24

This process will also help chicks to find water more
quickly once placed in the brooding area. If using bell
drinkers, all drinkers within the brooding area should be
checked to ensure water is present. Take measures to
ensure that chicks are never given cold water. The water
supplied to the chicks should be approximately 18–21°C
(64.4–69.8°F) (Table 2.2). Adapt the water pressure for
young chicks, considering the manufacturer's guidelines.
Table 2.2
Effect of water temperature on water intake.
Water
Temperature

Water Intake

Less than
5°C (41.0°F)

Too cold, reduced water consumption

18-21°C
(64.4–69.8°F)

Ideal

Greater than 30°C
Too warm, reduced water consumption
(86.0°F)
Above 44°C
(111.2°F)

Birds refuse to drink

Table 2.3
Recommended drinking space requirements
during brooding.
Drinker Type

Drinking Space

Bell

8 drinkers per 1,000 chicks
(125 chicks per drinker)

Nipple

10–12 birds per nipple

Mini-drinker or tray

12 mini-drinkers per
1,000 chicks

In hot climates, the water temperature should be lower
than the environmental temperature. Ensure water tanks
and pipes are out of direct sunlight and well insulated.
It can be advantageous to flush nipple lines at least twice
daily for the first 3–4 days to keep the water flow high
and the water temperature cool.
At placement and for the first 24 hours after placement,
chicks should not have to travel more than 2 m (6.6 ft)
to access feed or water. Initially, textured feed should
be provided as a sieved crumble (2 mm [0.08 in] diameter)
on supplementary feeder trays (1 per 100 chicks) and/or
on paper (occupying at least 70% of the brooding area).
Paper can provide easier access to feed, and the sound
can attract birds’ curiosity to find food. The paper should
be positioned alongside the feeding systems to aid the
transition from supplementary to automated systems.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Placing paper underneath the water lines should be
avoided. At placement, chicks should be placed directly
onto paper so that feed is immediately found. If the paper
does not disintegrate naturally, it should be removed
gradually from the house no later than the end of day
4 if chicks are being vaccinated against coccidiosis.
Keep feed away from heat sources or direct hot air
flow to prevent spoilage and to avoid chicks becoming
dehydrated or discouraged from eating.

If a brooding ring controls chick movement during
early brooding, the area contained by the brooding ring
should gradually be expanded from 3 days of age.
The age at which brooding rings are completely removed
will depend on ambient temperature, stocking density,
and housing type. For example, in closed-environment
houses, brooding rings can be removed entirely from
7 days of age but may need to stay in place until
10–12 days of age in open-sided houses.

At placement, provide 23 hours of light with a minimum
30–40 lux (2.7–3.7 fc) intensity and 1 hour of dark
(less than 0.4 lux [0.04 fc]) to help the chicks adapt to
the new environment and encourage feed and water intake.
Gradually reach 4–6 hours of darkness by 7 days, preferring
to have the lights turn on at the same time each day.

Where half, or part-house brooding is used, the automated
feeding and drinking systems in the empty area must be
filled and operating correctly. The correct environmental
conditions must be provided on the day the partitions are
removed, and the chicks are given access. This ensures
the feed is fresh and avoids attracting rodents.

KEY POINTS
Preheat the house and stabilize temperature and humidity at least 24 hours prior to the arrival of chicks.
Spread litter evenly at an appropriate depth (2–4 cm [0.8–1.6 in]).
Make feed and water available to the chicks immediately.
Provide 23 hours of light for the first 7 days to encourage feed and water intake.
Chicks should not have to travel more than 2 m (6.6 ft) to access feed and water.
Position supplementary feeders and drinkers alongside the main feeding and drinking systems.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

25

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Brooding Setup
There are two standard systems of temperature control used for brooding broiler chicks, whole-house and spot brooding.
Whole-House Brooding
Whole-house brooding refers to situations where a direct or indirect heat source heats the whole house, or a defined
part of it, creating a uniform temperature throughout. The heat source is larger and more widely spread than in spot
brooding. Even though the entire house is heated, chicks may stay in a particular area designated for brooding.
Since there is no temperature gradient, the ability of chicks to move to a preferred zone is limited. The primary heat
source can be direct or indirect, and supplementary brooders might also be needed. The use of energy-efficient heat
exchangers is becoming more common for better environmental control. A layout for whole-house brooding is shown
in Figure 2.5.
In cases where only part of the house is used, the whole house must be heated to encourage movement into the
remaining area, before chicks are fully released at around 7 days.

5 m (16.5 ft)

Figure 2.5
Typical layout of a whole-house brooding system (1,000 chicks).

70%
Paper Cover

26

Floor Material
(e.g., wood
shavings)

8
Bell Drinkers

12
Feeder Trays

12
Mini-Drinkers

Automatic
Feeder

Nipples

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Spot Brooding
In spot brooding, the heat source (canopy or radiant heaters) is local, so chicks can move closer to or away from it
and select a preferred temperature. Manufacturer’s guidelines should be consulted for equipment positioning and heat
output. Brooding rings can be used to control early chick movement.
The layout for a spot brooding setup, which would be typical for 1,000 chicks on day 1, is shown in Figure 2.6.
Chicks are placed in a 5 by 5 m or 16.4 by 16.4 ft2 (25 m2/269 ft2) space, which gives an initial stocking density of
40 chicks per m2 (0.27 ft2/bird). If stocking density is increased, the number of feeders and drinkers and the heating
capacity of the brooder should be increased accordingly.
Figure 2.6
Example of a typical spot brooding layout (1,000 chicks).

BROODER

2 m (6.6 ft)

1 m (3.3 ft)

2 m (6.6 ft)

5 m (16.5 ft)

70%
Paper Cover

8
Bell Drinkers

12
Feeder Trays

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

12
Mini-Drinkers

Automatic
Feeder

Floor Material
(e.g., wood shavings)

27

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Within the context of the setup in Figure 2.6, Figure 2.7
shows the temperature gradients surrounding the spot
brooder. These are marked A (brooder edge) and
B (2 m [6.6 ft] from brooder edge). Respective optimum
temperatures are shown in Table 2.4. Follow the
brooder manufacturer’s recommendations for brooder
positioning and actual heat output.
Other types of brooding and temperature control
systems exist. These include under-floor heating
systems, heat exchangers, hot water heating, hatching
within broiler houses, and hatch-brooding systems.
These systems should be managed according to the
manufacturer's guidelines and using bird behavior.
No matter which brooding system is used, the objective
is to encourage feed intake and activity as early as
possible. Uniformly achieving the optimum temperature
and RH is critical. Ideal brooding temperatures are given
in Table 2.4.

Figure 2.7
Spot brooding temperature gradients.

Brooder

2m
(6.6 ft)

2m
(6.6 ft)

Brooder edge

2 m (6.6 ft) from
brooder edge

Table 2.4
Broiler house temperatures. After 27 days of age, the temperature should remain at 20°C (68.0°F) or be
altered based on bird behavior. The temperatures indicated are based on an RH of 60–70% up to 3 days
of age and an RH of 50% after that.

28

Body Weight
g (lb)

House
Environment
Temperature
°C (°F)

44 (0.10)

Spot Brooding Temperature °C (°F)
Brooder Edge (A)

2 m (6.6 ft) from
Brooder Edge (B)

30 (86.0)

32 (89.6)

29 (84.2)

100 (0.22)

28 (82.4)

30 (86.0)

27 (80.6)

180 (0.40)

27 (80.6)

28 (82.4)

25 (77.0)

290 (0.64)

26 (78.8)

27 (80.6)

25 (77.0)

425 (0.94)

25 (77.0)

26 (78.8)

25 (77.0)

590 (1.30)

24 (75.2)

25 (77.0)

790 (1.74)

23 (73.4)

24 (75.2)

1015 (2.24)

22 (71.6)

23 (73.4)

1260 (2.78)

21 (69.8)

21 (69.8)

>1530 (3.37)

20 (68.0)

20 (68.0)

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Chick Placement
Before chick delivery, a final check of feed and water
availability and distribution within the brooding area
should be made.
At placement, chicks must be placed quickly, gently,
and evenly onto paper within the brooding area. The
longer the chicks remain in the boxes after arriving on
the farm, the greater the risk of potential overheating
and dehydration, resulting in reduced welfare, poor chick
start, uniformity, and growth. The empty chick boxes
should be removed from the house immediately to avoid
any hygiene/biosecurity issues.
After placement, leave the chicks to settle for 1–2 hours
to become accustomed to their new environment. Then,
complete a check to see that all chicks have found
both feed and water and that environmental conditions
are correct. Adjust equipment and temperatures where
necessary based on bird behavior, vent temperatures,
and crop fill assessment.

Environmental Control

KEY POINTS
Unload chicks and place them quickly, gently and
evenly onto paper in the brooding area.
Arrange equipment to enable the chicks to access
feed and water easily.
Leave the chicks to settle for 1–2 hours with
access to feed and water.
Check feed, water, vent temperature, house
temperature and humidity after 1–2 hours and
adjust where necessary.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Poster: Evaluating Brooding Temperature

Humidity
Relative humidity in the hatcher at the end of the
incubation process will be high (approximately 80%).
Houses operating with whole-house brooding, especially
where nipple drinkers are used, can have RH levels lower
than 25%. Houses with more conventional equipment
(such as spot brooders, which produce moisture as a
by-product of combustion, and bell drinkers, which have
open water surfaces) have a much higher RH, usually
over 50%. To limit the moisture lost by the chicks when
transferring from the hatcher, RH levels in the first 3 days
after placement should be 60–70%. Chicks kept at the
correct humidity levels are less prone to dehydration and
generally make a better, more uniform start.

Broiler How To 1:
Set Up a Spot Brooding Circle

Broiler How To 2:
Set Up Whole-House Brooding

RH within the broiler house should be monitored daily
using a hygrometer. The environment will be dry and
dusty if it falls below 50% in the first week. The chicks
will begin to dehydrate and be predisposed to respiratory
challenges. Performance will be adversely affected, so
action should be taken to increase RH.
If the house is fitted with high-pressure spray nozzles (e.g.,
foggers or misters) for cooling in high temperatures, these
can increase RH during brooding. Alternatively, RH can be
increased using a portable backpack sprayer to spray the
walls (or cooling pads in tunnel houses) with a fine mist.
As the chick grows, the ideal RH falls. High RH (above
70%) from 7 days onward can cause wet litter and
associated problems. As the broilers increase in live
weight, RH levels can be controlled using ventilation
and heating systems (see section on Environmental
Requirements).

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

29

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Interaction Between Temperature and Humidity
The temperature experienced by an animal is dependent on the dry bulb temperature and RH. Birds lose heat to
the environment by evaporation of moisture from the respiratory tract and through the skin. At a higher RH, less
evaporative moisture loss occurs, increasing the chicks’ apparent temperature (i.e., the temperature that the chick
feels) at a particular dry bulb temperature. Therefore, high RH increases the apparent temperature at a specific dry bulb
temperature, whereas low RH will decrease the apparent temperature. Before any temperature changes are made, the
minimum ventilation rate must be checked to ensure it is correct; increases and decreases in RH can be caused by
incorrect ventilation.
Table 2.5 shows the relationship between RH and apparent (dry bulb) temperature. If RH is outside the target range,
the house temperature at chick level should be adjusted in accordance with the figures provided in the table.
At all stages, monitor chick behavior to ensure the chick is experiencing an adequate temperature (see subsection
on Monitoring Chick Behavior). If behavior indicates that the chicks are too cold or hot, adjust the house
temperature accordingly.
Table 2.5
Principles of how optimum dry bulb temperatures for broilers may change at varying RH. Dry bulb temperatures
at the ideal RH at a weight less than 200 g (0.44 lb)+ are colored green.
Dry Bulb Temperature °C (°F)

Body Weight
g (lb)

40 RH%

50 RH%

60 RH%

70 RH%

44 (0.10)

36.0 (96.8)

33.2 (91.8)

30.8 (87.4)

29.2 (84.6)

100 (0.22)

33.7 (92.7)

31.2 (88.2)

28.9 (84.0)

27.3 (81.1)

180 (0.40)

32.5 (90.5)

29.9 (85.8)

27.7 (81.9)

26.0 (78.8)

290 (0.64)

31.3 (88.3)

28.6 (83.5)

26.7 (80.1)

25.0 (77.0)

425 (0.94)

30.2 (86.4)

27.8 (82.0)

25.7 (78.3)

24.0 (75.2)

590 (1.30)

29.0 (84.2)

26.8 (80.2)

24.8 (76.6)

23.0 (73.4)

790 (1.74)

27.7 (81.9)

25.5 (77.9)

23.6 (74.5)

21.9 (71.4)

1015 (2.24)

26.9 (80.4)

24.7 (76.5)

22.7 (72.9)

21.3 (70.3)

1260 (2.78)

25.7 (78.3)

23.5 (74.3)

21.7 (71.1)

20.2 (68.4)

>1530 (3.37)

24.8 (76.6)

22.7 (72.9)

20.7 (69.3)

19.3 (66.7)

Temperature calculations based on a formula from Dr. Malcolm Mitchell (Scotland's Rural College).
This table provides general guidance; however, individual climatic conditions should be considered.
Recent research suggests that RH is less critical for body weights between 200 g (0.44 lb) and 2,500 g (5.51 lb).
Further studies are underway to assess RH effects at both lower and higher body weights.
+

30

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Ventilation
Ventilation without drafts is required during the brooding period to:
Maintain temperatures and RH at the correct level.
Replenish oxygen (O2).
Remove excess moisture, CO2, and waste gases produced by the chicks (and possibly the heating system).

Establishing a minimum ventilation rate before chick placement is good practice. This will ensure good initial air quality and
that fresh air is supplied to the chicks at frequent, regular intervals (see subsection on Minimum Ventilation in Section 6).
Circulation fans can help maintain steady air quality and temperature at chick level.
Birds are prone to wind-chill effects, especially young chicks, and small chicks from young donor flocks (Figure 2.8).
Therefore, the actual air speed at chick level should be less than 0.15 m/s (30 ft/min). Any ventilation applied during
brooding should not impact bird temperature.
Figure 2.8
The relationship between rate of heat loss and surface area to volume (SA:V) ratio.

Small Chick
=
Large SA:V

Large Chick
=
Small SA:V

Rate of heat loss is fast

Rate of heat loss is slow

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

31

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Monitoring of Temperature and Relative Humidity
Temperature and Relative Humidity should be monitored at least twice daily in the first 5 days and once daily
afterward. Temperature and humidity sensors for automatic systems should be located at bird level—a maximum of
30 cm (11.8 in) above floor height (Figure 2.9)—and evenly spread along the length of the house. During brooding,
sensors should be placed 2 m (6.6 ft) away from the edge of each brooder in spot brooding. For whole-house
brooding, one sensor should be placed in the center of the house, and an additional two sensors should be placed
halfway between the center and either end wall of the house. Sensors should be located where birds cannot touch
them and out of direct line with the heating system and ventilation inlets to avoid inaccurate measurements. The
system should control the house environment using an average of the readings from the sensors.
Conventional thermometers should be used to cross-check the accuracy of electronic sensors controlling automatic
systems. Automatic sensors should be calibrated at least once per flock.
Figure 2.9
Correct location for temperature and humidity sensors.

Example house:
Sensors evenly spread
along the length of
a 120 m house should
be 30 m (98 ft) apart.

120 m (394 ft)

Sensor

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Poster: The First 24 Hours

32

Broiler How To 3:
Monitor Temperature and Relative
Humidity

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Monitoring Chick Behavior
Temperature and humidity should be monitored daily, but
by far, the best indicator of correct brooding temperatures
is frequent and careful observation of chick behavior.

Figure 2.11
Typical distribution of chicks in whole-house
brooding (without chick surround) at different
temperatures.

Spot Brooding Behavior
With spot brooding, the correct temperature is indicated by
chicks being evenly spread throughout the brooding area,
as shown in Figure 2.10. Uneven chick distribution is a
sign of incorrect temperature, drafts, or air quality issues.
Whole-House Brooding Behavior
In whole-house brooding, monitoring chick behavior is
not as easy because there are no obvious heat sources.
Often, the chicks’ vocalizations may be the only indication
of distress. Given the opportunity, birds will congregate in
areas with the temperature closest to their requirements.
If environmental conditions are correct, chicks will usually
form social groups of 20–30, with movement between the
groups, and continuous feeding and drinking occurring.
Different distributions of chicks in whole-house brooding at
various temperatures are provided in Figure 2.11.
Air Quality
Poor air quality—in particular, high levels of CO2 and
carbon monoxide (CO) (>3,000 ppm CO2 and >10 ppm
CO)—will impact chick behavior. If air quality is poor,
chicks may become lethargic and stop eating. It is
essential to monitor chick behavior for these signs, make
routine air quality measurements, and adjust ventilation
accordingly.
Figure 2.10
Bird distribution and behavior under brooders.

Temperature too high

Chicks make no noise.
Chicks pant; head and wings droop.
Chicks move away from brooder.

Temperature correct

Chicks are evenly spread.
Noise level signifies contentment.

Temperature too low

KEY POINTS
Establish a minimum ventilation rate prior to placement
to provide fresh air and remove waste gases.
Achieve an RH level of 60–70% for the first 3 days and
above 50% for the remainder of the brooding period
(until 10 days of age).
Where RH is high, check air quality and minimum
ventilation rate before reducing the temperature.
Adjust temperature settings if RH increases above
or falls below recommendations while responding to
changes in chick behavior.
Monitor the temperature and RH regularly and check
automatic equipment with manual measurements at
chick level.

Chicks crowd to brooder.
Chicks are noisy, distress-calling.

Drafts create wind-chill effects and must be avoided
during brooding.

Draft

Use chick behavior to determine if environmental
conditions are correct.

Chicks huddle in one area of the surround.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

33

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Chick Start Assessment
Crop Fill
Immediately after the chicks are placed on the broiler
farm, they are expected to eat, drink, and fill their crops.
Conducting a crop fill assessment at key times after
placement helps determine early appetite development
and ensure that all chicks have found feed and water.
Crop fill should be monitored during the first 48 hours,
but the first 24 hours after placement are crucial. An
initial check 2 hours after placement will indicate whether
chicks have found feed and water. Subsequent checks
at 4, 8, 12, and 24 hours after arrival on the farm
should also be made to assess appetite development
(Table 2.6). To do this, samples of 30–40 chicks should
be collected at three or four locations in the house. Each
chick’s crop should be gently palpated. In chicks that
have found feed and water, the crop will be full, soft, and
rounded (Figure 2.12). If the crop is full, but the original
texture of the crumble is still apparent, the bird has not
yet consumed enough water.

Figure 2.12
Crop fill after 24 hours. The chick on the top
has a full, rounded crop, while the chick on the
bottom has an empty crop.

If crop fill is below target, then the following points need
to be considered: assess the environmental conditions
(Table 2.7) and the provision of feed and water (Table 2.8).
Table 2.6
Target crop fill assessment.
Time of Crop Fill
After Placement

Minimum Crop Fill
(% of chicks with
full crop)

2 hours

75

4 hours

80

8 hours

>80

12 hours

>85

24 hours

>95

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

How To Video: Crop Fill

Broiler How To 4: Assess Crop Fill

Early crop fill in the first 2–4 hours is crucial. The sooner
chicks get to 100% crop fill, the better the chick start.

Chick Vent Temperature
Measuring vent temperatures is a good way of determining
if environmental conditions are optimal for the chicks.
Correct chick body temperatures will usually be achieved
using ambient conditions within the ranges provided in
Table 2.4 and Table 2.5. However, any recommended
ambient temperatures, RH, and air speeds given in this
publication are guidelines only. The only truly correct

34

environmental condition is where all three factors come
together correctly to provide an ideal chick vent temperature
for the first 2 days after hatching; that is 39.4–40.5oC
(103–105oF) measured with a quantitative instrument such
as a Braun Thermoscan® thermometer applied to the clean
and dry vent of the chick. Vent temperature should be
monitored in conjunction with observing bird behavior.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Monitoring the vent temperatures of the chicks
(Figure 2.13) from different areas of the transport vehicle
during unloading (5 chicks from one box taken from the
rear, middle, and front of the vehicle) at the farm can provide
useful information about the uniformity of temperature and
environmental conditions during transportation.

Figure 2.13
Taking chick vent temperature.

The thermometer should be calibrated or replaced
after one year.
If a thermometer is unavailable, the chick's temperature
can be quickly gauged by feeling its feet against the
cheek or between the fingers.
NOTE: Vent temperature should not be taken on chicks
with wet or dirty vents—this will give an inaccurate reading.

KEY POINTS
Crop fill assessments should be conducted at key
times after placement to ensure that all chicks have
found feed and water.
Failure to achieve crop fill targets should be
investigated immediately.
Chick vent temperatures should be maintained
between 39.4–40.5°C (103–105°F) during the first
2 days of brooding.
Body weight and CV% at placement and at 7 days
should be recorded to check the quality of the
brooding period.

Body Weight Recording
Collecting individual body weights at placement and again
at 7 days of age is good practice. Recording individual bird
information at these ages allows accurate monitoring of early
body weight development and allows early flock uniformity
(CV%/uniformity%) to be calculated. The change in CV%
between placement and 7 days provides useful management
information on the effectiveness of the brooding procedures
(see Table 3.3).

Table 2.7
Environmental condition checklist.
Observation

Yes/No?

Was the house adequately prewarmed
before chick placement?
Were air temperature, litter temperature,
and RH correct at chick placement?
Was the CO2 level <3,000 ppm at chick
placement?
Is light intensity and distribution optimal
in the brooding area?
Are ventilation rates correct and uniform
throughout the house?
Is the air quality satisfactory?

Table 2.8
Feed and water checklist.
Observation

Yes/No?

Do chicks have unrestricted access to
feed and water?
Is at least 70% of the floor area covered
in paper?
Is the feeder and drinking space correct?
Is the starter feed form correct? Have
feed amounts been replenished in small,
frequent amounts?

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Hatchery How To 7: Check Your Chicks
are Comfortable

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

How To Video: Vent Temperature

35

SECTION 2

CHICK MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Notes

36

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 3

MONITORING LIVE WEIGHT AND UNIFORMITY OF PERFORMANCE

CONTENTS

Section 3: Monitoring Live Weight and Uniformity
of Performance
Objective
To assess live flock performance by regularly weighing birds and comparing against targets for age to ensure
that defined, end-product specifications are met as closely as possible.

Principles
Profitability depends on maximizing the proportion of birds that closely meet target specifications, which requires
predictable and uniform growth.
Growth management depends upon knowledge of past, present, and likely future growth performance. This knowledge
can only be achieved if growth is measured accurately over time.

Predictability of Live Weight
Prediction of flock live weight at depletion requires
large numbers of birds (approximately 100 [or 1%
of the population] or more depending on flock CV%/
uniformity%) to be repeatedly sampled close to
processing age (within 2–3 days).

Accurate data on live weight and CV% or uniformity%
(Table 3.1) for each flock is crucial for planning
processing age and maximizing the number of birds
within target weight bands at depletion.
Coefficient of Variation % (CV%) — a measure of
the variation (spread) in body weights within the flock.
The lower the CV%, the less variable the flock. CV%
is calculated as the standard deviation divided by the
average weight.

Table 3.2
Minimum number of birds in a sample to give
accurate estimates of live weight according
to flock uniformity.

Uniformity % — a measure of the percentage of the
flock that falls within +/-10% of the average body
weight. It measures the evenness of body weights
within a flock; the higher the uniformity, the less variable
a flock is.

Uniformity of Flock+

Minimum Number of
Birds to be Weighed

Uniform
CV% = 8
Uniformity% = 79

65

Table 3.2 shows the minimum number of birds required
to be sampled to give a live-weight estimate of defined
reliability and accuracy within flocks of differing uniformity.

Moderately Uniform
CV% = 10
Uniformity% = 68

100

Birds should be weighed at least once per week. However,
increasing the frequency and number of birds weighed will
provide more accurate measurements and predictions of
live weight and uniformity. As growth rate increases and
processing age becomes earlier, precise measurement of live
weight often requires weighing to be completed twice weekly.

Poorly Uniform
CV% = 12
Uniformity% = 60

140

+
Estimate of live weight will be within ±2% of actual live
weight and will be correct 95% of the time.

Table 3.1
Relationship between CV% and uniformity%.
Uniformity%

95

90

85

79

73

68

64

60

56

52

50

47

CV%

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

37

SECTION 3

MONITORING LIVE WEIGHT AND UNIFORMITY OF PERFORMANCE

CONTENTS

Manual Weighing
When weighing birds manually, birds should be weighed
regularly and at the same time of day. On each occasion,
similar sample sizes of birds should be taken from at
least three locations in each house or pen. Catching and
handling of birds without causing them injury or distress
requires skill. It should only be performed by competent
personnel appropriately trained for the task, and bird
welfare must always be considered.

Figure 3.1
Example of the correct sampling points within
a broiler house.

Birds can be weighed using manual scales (accurate to
±20 g [0.71 oz]) or electronic scales (accurate to ±1 g
[0.04 oz]). Either weighing scale can be used successfully,
but the same scale should be used each time for reliable,
repeatable measurements of an individual flock. Before
every weighing, scales should be calibrated against
known standard weights for accuracy and repeatability.
Unexpected changes in live weight may indicate scale error
or malfunction and should be investigated immediately.

Bulk Bird Weighing
Between 0 and 21 days, birds can be weighed as a bulk
sample. Each time, a minimum of 100 birds (or 1% of the
population, whichever is larger) should be weighed. If birds
are sexed or divided into different pens by donor flock age,
a minimum of 100 birds (or 1% of the population, whichever
is larger) of each sex or group should be weighed. Birds
should be caught using a catching frame or pen. Scales
should be suspended above the pen in a secure place and
set to “zero” with the bucket or weighing vessel that birds
will be placed into in position. Birds should be sampled from
at least 3 evenly distributed locations throughout each house
(or divided pen if birds are raised separately); sampling
points should be away from doors and walls (Figure 3.1).
In this way, samples will be as representative as possible
and estimates of body weight will have higher accuracy.

Bird sample points

Figure 3.2
Manual bulk weighing of chicks with an electronic
scale.

Calmly and correctly handle the birds, placing them into
the weighing vessel until it has the desired number of birds
in it (10–20 birds depending on the size of the vessel).
Never place birds on top of each other or over-crowd the
birds in the weighing vessel. Place the weighing vessel
back onto the scales (Figure 3.2), wait until it is still,
and then record the bulk weight from the scale and the
number of birds per weighing before releasing the birds
back into the main house area. Repeat this process until
all birds in the sample within the catching pen have been
weighed (this will eliminate any selective bias).
When all sample birds for the house have been weighed,
add all recorded weights together and divide by the total
number of birds weighed to give the average bird weight for
that house. Bulk weighing only allows the determination of
average bird weight. Comparing average weight to target
weight facilitates management decisions. However, for
the determination of CV%/uniformity%, birds need to be
individually weighed.

38

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 3

MONITORING LIVE WEIGHT AND UNIFORMITY OF PERFORMANCE

CONTENTS

Individual Bird Weighing
Individual birds should be weighed from 21–28 days and
onward to determine weekly flock uniformity, depending
on the processing age. Birds should be caught using a
catching frame or pen in at least three points within each
population and away from doors and walls (Figure 3.1).
Scales should be suspended above the pen in a secure
place and set to “zero” with a shackle attached to hold
the birds firmly during the weighing process. This may
be a specially-designed shackle which can be wrapped
around each leg to hold the bird in place while weighing
(Figure 3.3). It is also possible to individually weigh birds
using a platform scale (Figure 3.4) for individual weights.
A minimum of 100 birds (or 1% of the population,
whichever is larger) should be weighed each time. If birds
are sexed or divided by different donor flocks, then a
minimum of 100 birds (or 1% of the population, whichever
is larger) of each population should be weighed. Calmly
and correctly pick up each bird and place it into the
shackles. Wait until it is still and record the weight from
the scale, and then release the bird back into the main
house area.
All birds in the catching pen must be weighed to
eliminate selective bias. Once all sample birds have
been weighed for the house, calculate average live
weight and CV%/uniformity% for each house.
Figure 3.3
Individual bird weighing with an electronic scale.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Broiler How To 5: Bulk Weigh Broilers
Between 0 and 21 Days

Broiler How To 6: Individually Weigh
Broilers From 21–28 Days Onward

Automatic Weighing Systems
Automatic weighing systems (Figure 3.4) are applicable
for daily weight monitoring in broiler houses to improve
feed management, growth monitoring, and finishing
day predictions. They should be located where large
numbers of birds congregate and where individual birds
remain long enough to record weights.
Inaccurate live weight estimation will result from small
sample sizes. For example, older and heavier males use
auto-weighers less frequently, which biases the mean
flock body weight downward. Weight bandwidth should
be set (e.g., ±20% of average weight) to avoid multiple
birds standing on the scale simultaneously. Readings
from any auto-weigher should be regularly checked for
usage rate (number of completed weights per day), and
the mean live weights achieved should be cross-checked
by manual weighing at least once weekly.
Figure 3.4
Automatic weighing.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

39

SECTION 3

MONITORING LIVE WEIGHT AND UNIFORMITY OF PERFORMANCE

CONTENTS

If a sample weighing produces data inconsistent with the
previous weights or expected gains, a second sample of
birds should be weighed immediately. This will confirm
whether or not there is a problem and identify potential
issues (e.g., improper sampling procedures, feed change,
drinker failures, temperature fluctuation, or disease) that
need to be rectified.
KEY POINTS

Figure 3.5
Broiler body weight distribution.
% of Flock at Particular Live Weight

Inconsistent Weight Data

Birds should be weighed frequently from day-old, using
a standardized, accurate, and repeatable procedure.
The number of birds weighed must be sufficiently
large enough to ensure accurate results.
Birds weighed must be representative of the whole flock.
The same set of scales should be used each time and
scale accuracy must be checked before every weighing.
Birds should be caught and handled without causing
them injury or distress.

Variable flocks will have a high CV% and lower uniformity%;
uniform flocks will have a lower CV% and higher uniformity%.
Each sex will have a normal distribution of live weight.
An as-hatched (mixed-sex) flock will have a higher CV%
(lower uniformity%) than single-sex flocks. This is because
an as-hatched flock is effectively two flocks mixed (male
and female, Figure 3.5). The same principle applies to the
flock from different donor groups.
CV% is determined with the following equation:

Average Body Weight

Male

10

Female

8
6
4
2
0
1.0

(2.2)

1.5

2.0

(3.3)

2.5

(4.4)

3.0

(5.5)

3.5

(6.6)

(7.7)

4.0

(8.8)

Weight kg (lb)

Figure 3.6 shows weight distributions at different
levels of CV%/uniformity% for 3 single-sexed flocks,
all achieving a target live weight of 1.9 kg (4.2 lb).
Weight distributions within each flock are quite different.
The lower the CV% (the less variation in the flock),
the more birds achieve the target.
Figure 3.6
Effect of CV% or uniformity% on live weight bands
in a flock of sexed broilers.

% of Flock in Live Weight Band

The CV% or uniformity% describes the variability of
a population (the flock).

Standard Deviation

As hatched

12

14

Flock CV%/Uniformity%

CV% =

14

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.3

(2.9)

1.5

(3.3)

1.7

(3.7)

1.9

(4.2)

2.1

(4.6)

2.3

2.5

(5.1)

(5.5)

2.7
(6.0)

Weight kg (lb)
CV% = 8
Uniformity% = 79

CV% = 10
Uniformity% = 68

CV% = 12
Uniformity% = 60

Flock Details:
Sexed flock (males or females), mean live weight 1.9 kg (4.2 lb).

x 100

Uniformity% is determined with the following equation:

Uniformity% =

Number of Birds within ±10%
of Average Body Weight

x 100

Total Number of Birds

40

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 3

MONITORING LIVE WEIGHT AND UNIFORMITY OF PERFORMANCE

CONTENTS

The proportion of birds achieving the target relates
to the width of the band allowed for the target and
the variability of the flock. Thus, if a live weight band
of 1.8–2.0 kg (4.0–4.4 lb) is required, even at a CV% of 8
only 58% of the birds achieve the required live weight
(see Figure 3.7).
Understanding these principles of biological variability
forms the basis of effective planning in processing plants.
Figure 3.7
Effect of CV%/uniformity% on the proportion
of birds in the target live weight band.

% of Flock in Live Weight Band

100

97

90

86

80

91

84

76

70

67

60

49

40
30

41

Table 3.3
CV% as a tool for assessing brooding management.

20
10
0

It is a good management practice to take individual body
weights of a sample of birds at day-old and then again
at 7 days of age. This will establish early flock uniformity
and its development over time and indicate the adequacy
of brooding management practices. At day-old, weighing
all the chicks individually in one box from each parent
stock source flock to determine initial flock uniformity
is recommended. At 7 days of age, individual weights
should be taken using the individual weighing procedures
described previously or an electronic platform scale
(Figure 3.8). As shown in Table 3.3, if the difference
between flock CV% at day-old and 7 days of age is
greater than 3 percentage points (e.g., CV% at day-old
is 6% and at 7 days of age is 10%), brooding practices
should be reviewed before the next flock is placed.
Stockman should also make regular visual assessments
of flock uniformity.

58

50

After 21 days of age, flock uniformity should be recorded
weekly.

1.8–2.0
(4.0–4.4)

1.7–2.1
(3.7–4.6)

1.6–2.2
(3.5–4.8)

Target Live Weight Band kgs (lbs)
CV% = 8
Uniformity% = 79

CV% = 10
Uniformity% = 68

CV% = 12
Uniformity% = 60

Profiling a flock's CV%/uniformity% is essential for
good broiler management.
Accurate communication of uniformity and live weight
information, along with deviations from the norm, helps the
broiler planning department determine the age for depletion
to meet customer requirements and economic models.
To help with this, Aviagen has developed an Excel
spreadsheet tool (UniPlus), which estimates the number
of birds within a population that will fall into a given
weight category based on the average body weight
and CV%/uniformity% of a sample.
Investigations into flocks or farms with poorer-thanexpected uniformity levels and variable weight-gain
records prevents processing and economic loss.
Areas to consider for investigation first are:

Difference in CV%
between day
0 and day 7

Chick start assessment

0%

Excellent

+1%

Very Good

+2%

Good

+3%

Average

+4%

Poor

+5%

Very Poor

Figure 3.8
Electronic platform scales for individual bird
weights up to 7 days of age.

Chick quality.
Brooding management.
Feeder and drinker management.
Feed quality (physical and nutritional composition).
Stocking densities.
Ventilation/environmental management.
Disease.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

41

SECTION 3

MONITORING LIVE WEIGHT AND UNIFORMITY OF PERFORMANCE

CONTENTS

KEY POINTS

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Birds in more uniform flocks will
be more likely to meet the required
target live weight specifications.

UniPlus Excel Spreadsheet Tool

Uniform flocks (low CV% or high
uniformity%) are more predictable in
performance than uneven flocks.

Separate-Sex Growing
The number of birds that achieve live weight at or close to the flock mean
can be predicted from the CV% of that flock. Improvements in uniformity
can be attained by growing flocks in single-sex populations from placement.
Where broilers are sourced from slow-feathering parent stock, they can
be sexed through the technique of feather sexing, which is described in
Appendix 5. Broilers sourced from fast-feathering parent stock cannot be
feather sexed.
The advantages of separate-sex growing can be maximized when males
and females are housed separately. Both sexes can then be managed more
efficiently regarding feeding, lighting, and stocking density.
Males grow faster, are more feed efficient, and have less carcass fat than
females. A different feeding program can be employed for the different sexes.
The most practical method is to use the same feeds for both sexes but to
introduce the finisher feed earlier for females (e.g., before 25 days of age).
It is recommended that the amount or duration of starter feed be kept the
same to ensure proper early development. Monitor birds’ behavior carefully
to understand the different requirements of both sexes. Figure 3.9
illustrates the distinct characteristics of females and males.

Minimize flock variability by
monitoring and managing flock
uniformity.
Variation in performance increases
the flock CV%, which influences both
flock profitability and processing
plant efficiency.
Grow males and females separately
to reduce variability.
Use separate-sex housing for males
and females to maximize benefits.

Figure 3.9
Distinct characteristics in female and male broilers.

Female
Faster
growth
during
brooding.

More
carcass fat.

42

Male

Average
daily gain
peaks earlier.

Higher
eviscerated
yield.

Average
daily gain
peaks later.

Faster growth
after brooding.

More feed
efficient
(lower
FCR).
Less carcass fat.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 4

PRE-PROCESSING MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Section 4: Pre-Processing Management
Objective
To manage the final phase of the production process so
that broilers are transferred to the processor in optimum
condition, ensuring that the processing requirements are
met and high standards of bird welfare are maintained.

Principles
Bird quality for the consumer will benefit from detailed
attention to the management of the environment
and welfare of the birds:
During catch.
While being handled between the broiler house and the
transport system.
During transportation.
At the processing plant.

The effective integration of the growing, catching, and
processing operations is crucial for producing high-quality
carcasses with good yields.

Preparation for Catching
Light
It is essential to return to 23 hours of light before catching.
By doing this, birds will have a longer time to access feed.
Also, with extended light hours pre-catch, birds are more
active, resulting in a shorter transit time for feed to pass
through the gastrointestinal tract (GIT). Birds should receive
at least 3 days of 23 hours of light before catching. Local
laws and regulations for light intensity should be adhered to,
but the minimum is 5–10 lux (0.5-0.9 fc). When adjusting
light intensity, consider the birds' feathering status and
stocking density to minimize stress and prevent injuries,
such as scratches.

Feed Withdrawal
Feed withdrawal is necessary to allow the contents of
the GIT to be emptied before processing. This reduces
the risk of fecal contamination during transportation and
at the processing plant and helps maintain GIT integrity
during processing.
Time in House Without Feed

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Tech Note: Pre-Processing Handling
in Broilers

+
Feed
Withdrawal =
Period

Catching Time
+
Transport Time
+

Aviagen Brief: Addressing Carcass
Quality Issues at the Processing Plant

Pocket Guide: Broiler Carcass
Condemnation and Downgrade
Management

Aviagen Brief: Deep Pectoral Myopathy

Holding (Lairage) Time

Feed withdrawal must balance food safety (by maximizing
the removal of GIT contents) and avoiding excessive
weight loss (by minimizing the time between the GIT
contents being emptied and processing). To achieve this
balance, it is recommended that feed be removed from the
birds 8–12 hours before processing (always adhere to local
laws and regulations). It is worth noting that although feed
will be removed, birds should have access to water; this
will also aid in GIT emptying.
An insufficient feed withdrawal period will result in the gut
not being fully emptied before processing. This will lead to
false estimates of live weight and increase the risk of fecal
contamination at the processing plant.
An excessive feed withdrawal period will result in unnecessary
additional weight loss before processing, reducing the likelihood
of achieving the target weight at the processing plant.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

43

SECTION 4

PRE-PROCESSING MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Feed withdrawal must complement the flock's regular
eating pattern and consider bird welfare, target weight,
and age. Broilers under good management with constant
access to feed and water will generally eat and drink
steadily throughout the day. Feeding typically occurs
approximately every 4 hours, with drinking happening
multiple times within each feeding cycle.
Feeding patterns must not be disrupted in the last few
days, particularly the last 24 hours before transportation.
This can lead to pronounced uncontrolled eating,
affecting gut fill, emptying of the GIT, and the overall
effectiveness of feed withdrawal. The most common
disruptions to feeding patterns are:
Feed availability (feed amount and feeding space).
Lighting program.
Temperature.

During feed withdrawal, leaving the empty feeders down until
the catching crews arrive may help to reduce litter eating.
After feed withdrawal begins, the flock should not be
disturbed (e.g., avoid excessive house walking or door
opening).
Whole grains (such as whole wheat) should be removed
2 days before processing to avoid the presence of
whole-grain remnants in the GIT during processing.
Feed Withdrawal and Weight Loss
Once the GIT is completely emptied, the rate of weight
loss will increase as body protein and fat are mobilized to
support metabolism. Water absorbed from body tissues
may also accumulate in the digestive tract, reducing
yield and meat quality and increasing the risk of fecal
contamination in the processing plant.
Once the GIT is completely emptied, birds will lose
between 0.25–0.40% of their body weight per hour,
depending on:
Bird age — weight loss is higher in older birds.
Sex — weight loss is higher in males.
House temperature — weight loss increases at
extreme temperatures (both high and low).
Eating pattern disruption before feed withdrawal —
weight loss between birds increases due to a variation
in GIT contents.
Length of time in transport crates/modules — weight
loss increases the longer birds stay in transport modules.
Holding temperature — weight loss increases in
higher temperatures.

A 3 kg (6.6 lb) bird will lose between 7.5 g (0.26 oz)
and 12.0 g (0.42 oz) of weight if left for only 1 extra
hour without feed after the GIT has emptied. If the
value of the meat is $1 per kg, this equates to a
loss of between 0.75 and 1.2 cents per bird.

Monitoring Feed Withdrawal
Feed withdrawal plans must be monitored and reviewed
for every flock and be modified promptly if problems occur.
If feed withdrawal is not managed correctly, there will be
consequences for bird welfare, profitability, food safety,
and shelf life.
Routine monitoring of feed withdrawal procedures is
necessary to ensure they remain appropriate. Visual
observation is the best way to monitor if feed withdrawal
times are correct. Watery droppings from broilers awaiting
processing, watery fluid in the small intestine, and litter in
the crop and gizzard at processing all indicate excessive
withdrawal times. The presence of feed in the crop or fecal
contamination at the processing plant shows that the feed
withdrawal period has been inadequate.

Water
Provide unlimited access to water until the point of catching.
Without water, birds may become dehydrated, and the rate
at which the GIT empties will be reduced.
Access to water is facilitated by:
Use of multiple drinker lines.
Separation of birds into pens.
Where bell drinkers are used, individual drinkers
are removed progressively during catching.

Pharmaceuticals
If pharmaceutical products (e.g., coccidiostats and other
prescribed medicines) have been administered to the
birds for any reason, they must be removed from the feed
or water for a sufficient time period before processing to
eliminate residues in the meat.
Advice from the pharmaceutical companies and local
laws and regulations for removal (withdrawal periods) of
coccidiostats and other prescribed medicines from the diet
are specified in product data sheets and must be adhered to.
Where a thinning or partial depletion program is used, it
may be necessary to increase the withdrawal period for
pharmaceutical products to satisfy the mandatory period
before processing. Withdrawal periods must always relate
to the time of first thinning.

This weight loss reduces both bird welfare and value
and must be minimized.

44

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 4

PRE-PROCESSING MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

KEY POINTS

Ventilation

Monitor and review feed withdrawal plans regularly.

During catching, house temperature should be between
16oC (60.8oF) and 18oC (64.4oF) where possible.
Ventilation must be controlled and adjusted carefully to
avoid heat stress or chilling. Birds should be monitored
closely for any signs of overheating (panting) or huddling,
which may lead to suffocation. Heaters should be turned
off to reduce the potential for accidents and overheating
during catching. Wind chill must be kept to a minimum.
However, fresh air must always be supplied throughout
the catching process.

Remove whole grain from the ration 2 days before
processing.

Thinning/Partial Depletion

Allow 3 days on 23 hours of light and 1 hour of dark
prior to catching.
Correct timing of feed removal from the birds ensures
that the digestive tract is empty before processing
commences.

Delay the removal of drinkers until catching time.
Follow statutory withdrawal periods for pharmaceutical
products.

Catching
Many causes of downgrading seen at processing will
have occurred when the birds were being caught and
handled. Catching should be planned carefully and
supervised closely. Catching time will depend on the
distance to the processing plant. The handling of birds
and the operation of machinery (such as harvesters
and forklifts) must be carried out by trained, competent
personnel. Bird welfare is paramount. During catching,
birds should be kept calm and bird activity minimized
to avoid bruising, scratching, wing damage, and other
injuries. Headlamps or blue light can promote calmness,
reducing flapping and potential issues with deep pectoral
myopathy. Sick, injured, or unfit birds should not
be loaded for transportation to the processing plant.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Thinning or partial depletion of a flock to meet specific
processing weight requirements must be managed
carefully to ensure the remaining birds in the house are
ventilated correctly during the thinning process. Unless
a house has been specially designed for a thinning
program, it is standard practice to withdraw feed several
hours in advance (always adhere to local laws and
regulations) while keeping water available until to the point
of catching. Time without feed for the remaining birds
must be kept to a minimum to avoid flightiness, which
can influence skin lesions. In some regions, birds are
caught under low light intensities to reduce flightiness.
Additionally, minimizing feed withdrawal helps prevent the
remaining birds from consuming feed too quickly once
thinning is complete, which can disrupt feed passage and
potentially gut health, leading to bacterial imbalance and
dysbacteriosis.
For the birds remaining in the house, house temperature
and ventilation must be maintained. The lighting schedule
should be changed from the pre-catching program to
a regular program. Using slightly brighter light intensity
encourages the remaining birds to migrate to areas
where birds have been removed. Monitor bird behavior
closely. Thinning should be completed in a biosecure way.
Any equipment used must be thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected before entering the house. This will minimize
the chances of cross-contamination and the introduction
of infectious agents.

45

SECTION 4

PRE-PROCESSING MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Pre-catch
The checks provided in Table 4.1 should be made before catching.
Table 4.1
Checklist before catching.
Pre-Catch Check

Action

Yes/No?

Time taken to catch and
transport birds

Is the time taken to catch and transport birds calculated correctly?

Number of crates/modules

Is the number of crates/modules and trucks required to transport the birds
calculated before catching?

Equipment

Is all equipment used (including vehicles, crates, fencing, and nets) clean,
disinfected, and in good condition?

Condition of the ground at
the house entrance
Litter
Feeding equipment
Penning

Is there a smooth exit for the loaded trucks?
If not, is the ground at the entrance to the poultry house (and any secondary
roads leading to the house) repaired, compacted, and leveled?
Is wet litter replaced for ease of catching?
Is feeding equipment removed from the house or repositioned to avoid obstruction
for the birds and personnel (i.e., raising feeding equipment above head height)?
Are partitions available for large houses to separate birds?
Is light intensity during catching reduced?
Is there a sudden increase in light intensity?
Is it nighttime catching?

Light intensity

Is the light intensity reduced to the lowest possible level that will allow the birds
to be caught safely?
Are headlamps or blue light used to keep birds calm?
If daytime catching, are curtains (or another material) used over the doors
to reduce light intensity (Figure 4.1)?
Is there any heat buildup within the house?

Ventilation

Is there sufficient air movement over the birds?
Are there birds showing signs of overheating (panting)?
Have heaters been turned off?

46

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 4

PRE-PROCESSING MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Figure 4.1
Examples of curtains used during daytime
catching to reduce light intensity.

When caught by hand, broilers should be carefully caught
and held by two contact points with the body (e.g., both
shanks around the body or using both hands to hold the
wings against the body [Figure 4.2]). Acceptable handling
methods must comply with local laws and regulations.
This will minimize distress, damage, and injury. Birds
should not be carried by the neck or by the wings.
Analyzing any bruising seen at the processing plant can
be a valuable means of establishing where problems
have occurred and if additional training is required.
Figure 4.3 details the changes in bruising color over
time. The key to troubleshooting and reducing future
risks of bruising is to determine if the bruise occurred at
the farm (>24 hours old), during catching (12–18 hours
old), or at the processing plant (within minutes).
Figure 4.2
Correct way to catch/hold a broiler.

Catch
Only birds fit for transport should be caught. During
catching, birds should be kept calm, and bird activity
should be minimized. Improperly completed and poorly
supervised catching (harvesting) can inflict damage by
bruising, wing breakage, and internal bleeding of the
legs. Review procedures regularly, have clear guidelines
for catching in place, and ensure correct and appropriate
training of the catchers.
Figure 4.3
Changes in bruising color with time.

36 Hours
Yellow,
Green-Purple

12 Hours
Dark Red-Purple

Within Minutes
Red

24 Hours
Light
Green-Purple

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

72 Hours
YellowOrange

48 Hours
Orange

120 Hours
Normal

96 Hours
Slight Yellow

47

SECTION 4

PRE-PROCESSING MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Once caught, the birds should be placed carefully into the
crates/modules, loading from the top down. Modules result
in less bird distress and damage than crates. Crates/modules
should be checked to ensure no birds have flipped onto their
backs. Any birds found on their backs should be corrected
before crates/modules are loaded onto the transport truck.
Overfilling transport crates/modules results in overheating,
bird distress, increased mortality, and a higher incidence
of condemnations at the processing plant. Having too few
birds in the transport crate or module will result in birds being
chilled and/or unstable during transport, increasing damage.
The number of birds per transport crate/module is subject
to local laws and regulations. In high temperatures, the
number of birds per crate/module should be reduced; the
exact reduction will depend on temperature, the size of
the crate/module, the average bird weight, and local laws
and regulations.
Mechanical catching must follow equipment manufacturers’
recommendations to avoid bird damage and distress.
Those operating mechanical harvesters must have
appropriate training. Mechanical equipment (see Figure 4.4)
must be operated at moderate speeds, with birds never
crowded or forced into the catcher. Careful alignment of
the catching equipment chute with the opening of the
crate/module is necessary to avoid damage.
The main house doors should remain closed during
catching to maintain adequate negative pressure and
ventilation. The ability to do this will depend on the
catching method being used.

KEY POINTS
Plan carefully and supervise catching closely.
Catching should be carried out by competent and
trained personnel only.
Reduce light intensity prior to catching.
Remove or raise obstructions such as feeders or
drinkers before beginning the catching operation.
Minimize bird activity during catching to avoid injuries
and optimize product quality.
Use partitions in large houses to avoid crowding.
Maintain adequate ventilation during catching and
monitor birds closely for signs of overheating.
During thinning, the environment for any birds
remaining in the house must be maintained as much
as possible, and access to feed and water must be
given immediately after catching is complete.
Within local laws and regulations, adjust bird numbers
in crates/modules to allow for bird weight and ambient
temperature.

Figure 4.4
Example of mechanical harvesting.

48

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 4

PRE-PROCESSING MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Transport

Delivery

Transportation vehicles (Figure 4.5) must provide adequate
protection from the weather, maintain appropriate
ventilation, and comply with local laws and regulations.

The road from the farm to the processing plant should be
smooth, with limited road bumps, holes, and cracks; this
is key to minimizing bird discomfort before processing.
At the processing plant, trucks should be parked under
a covered area, and any canvas that may restrict
ventilation should be removed.

The microclimate in the bird compartment of the
transport vehicle will be different from the temperature
and humidity outside. Ventilation and extra heating
or cooling should be used when necessary.
In hot weather, consider using fans while loading the
birds to keep the air circulating through the crates/
modules on the truck. To improve air flow, allow at
least 10 cm (3.9 in) between every two tiers of crates
or introduce empty transport crates at regular intervals
throughout the load.
Birds can quickly become overheated when the transport
vehicle is stationary, particularly in hot weather or if
onboard ventilation is unavailable. The travel plan should
allow the vehicle to leave the farm as soon as loading is
complete. Driver breaks should be short and within the
requirements of local laws and regulations.

Holding facilities at the processing plant should provide
ventilation and temperature control (Figure 4.6).
The holding areas should have fully operational lights,
fans, and foggers. Low-intensity blue light can help keep
the birds calm during holding time. Foggers should be
used during high temperatures if RH is below 70%.
Water can be sprayed into the fans in hot weather
to assist evaporative cooling.
Figure 4.6
Example of appropriate holding facilities at the
processing plant.

Unloading at the processing plant holding area should
be completed without delay. If a delay in unloading is
unavoidable, supplemental ventilation is required.
In cold weather, the load should be covered (with curtains)
to minimize wind chill during transport. Check bird comfort
frequently.
Figure 4.5
Examples of vehicles suitable for transporting
broilers to the processing plant.

KEY POINTS
Local transportation laws and regulations must be
followed.
Vehicles must provide:
• Adequate protection from the environment.
• Suitable ventilation during transportation.
When necessary, additional ventilation and heating
should be used:
• During loading.
• When the vehicle is stationary.
• In the holding area at the processing plant.
Birds should not remain on the vehicle for any longer
than necessary.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

49

SECTION 4

PRE-PROCESSING MANAGEMENT

CONTENTS

Notes

50

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

Section 5: Provision of Feed and Water
Objective
To provide a range of balanced diets that satisfy the nutrient
needs of broiler chickens at all stages of their development
and production, which optimize efficiency and profitability as
well as support bird welfare and sustainability. The drinking
and feeding systems, together with their management, will
impact feed and water intake, and thus, the ability to deliver
a defined feeding strategy to the bird.

Principles

Broiler Nutrition
The nutritional information included in this section
is targeted, in particular, toward stockmen and live
production personnel.
The Broiler Nutrition Supplement provides
background information on the Broiler Nutrition
Specifications for nutritionists who are involved in
decision making of feed specifications and formulations.

Feed represents a large portion of broiler production costs.
To support optimum performance, broiler rations should be
formulated to provide the correct balance of energy, amino
acids (AA), essential fatty acids, minerals, and vitamins.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

The correct nutritional strategy will be dependent on
business objectives, including:

Broiler Nutrition Supplement

Final product — live or portioned products.
Supply and price of feed ingredients.
Logistics and operational capacity.
Rearing mixed-sex or sex-separate flocks.
Age and live weight at processing.
Yield and carcass quality.
Market requirements for skin color, shelf life, etc.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Supply of Nutrients
Energy
Broilers require energy for tissue growth, maintenance,
and activity. The major sources of energy in poultry feeds
are typically cereal grains (primarily carbohydrates) and

51

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

fats. Dietary energy levels are expressed in megajoules
(MJ)/kg, kilocalories (kcal)/kg, or kcal/lb of apparent
metabolizable energy corrected to zero nitrogen
retention (AMEn), as this represents the energy
available to the broiler.
Protein
Feed proteins, such as those found in soybean meal, are
complex compounds that are broken down by digestion
into AA. These AA are absorbed and assembled into
body proteins, which are used in the synthesis of body
tissue (e.g., muscles, nerves, skin, and feathers). Dietary
crude protein levels do not indicate the quality of the
protein in feed ingredients. Dietary protein quality is
based on the level, balance, and digestibility of essential
AA in the final mixed feed.
The modern broiler is responsive to dietary digestible
AA density and will respond with improved growth, feed
efficiency, and carcass yield. Higher levels of digestible
AA have been shown to improve broiler performance and
processing yields further. However, feed ingredient prices
and meat product values will determine the economically
appropriate nutrient density to be fed.
Macro Minerals
The macro minerals that are needed in larger amounts
than trace minerals are calcium (Ca), phosphorus (P),
magnesium (Mg), sodium (Na), potassium (K), and
chloride (Cl). Providing the proper levels and balance of
macro minerals is important to support growth, skeletal
development, the immune system, and digestibility,
as well as to maintain litter quality. Calcium, P are
particularly important for optimal skeletal development.
Excess levels of Na, K, and Cl can increase water
consumption and lead to litter quality issues and
Footpad dermatitis (FPD).
Trace Minerals and Vitamins
Trace minerals and vitamins are required for all metabolic
functions and recommended levels support broiler health
and overall performance.

KEY POINTS
Broiler feeds formulated to the recommended
Broiler Nutrition Specifications will supply birds with
adequate energy, digestible AA, and vitamins and
minerals to support optimal broiler performance and
welfare.

52

Feeding Program
Starter Feed
During the incubation period, the chick uses the yolk sac as
a nutrient supply. However, during the first few days of life
post-hatch, chicks must undergo the physiological transition
to obtain their nutrients from the supplied manufactured feed.
The objective of the starter period is to support good
appetite, optimize organ development and achieve
maximum early growth. Broiler starter feed should be given
for at least 10 days, and extended if target body weights are
not achieved. Final body-weight performance is positively
correlated with early growth rate (e.g., 7-day body weight);
ensuring chicks get off to a good start is critical.
Chicks that do not start well are more susceptible
to disease challenges, compromised weight gain,
environmental stressors, and poorer breast meat quality.
Feeding the recommended nutrient levels during the starter
period will support good early growth and physiological
development, ensuring body-weight objectives and good
health and welfare standards are achieved. The use of a
highly nutrient-dense pre-starter diet can be beneficial when
historical data indicates body weight falling below the 7-day
target, as it helps support adequate early nutrient intake.
Feed consumption during the first 10–14 days of the chick’s
life represents only a small portion of the total feed consumed
and total feed cost by the time of processing. Therefore,
decisions on starter formulations should be based primarily
on promoting good biological performance and overall
profitability rather than purely on individual diet costs.
Grower Feed
The grower feed is normally fed for 10–14 days. The
transition from starter to grower feed may involve a change
of texture from crumble to pellets and also a change in
nutrient density. During the period the grower feed is fed,
broiler daily growth rates continue to increase rapidly. This
growth phase must be supported by adequate nutrient
intake. The transition from starter to grower feed must be
well managed to prevent any reduction in intake or growth.
Mixing the starter and grower for 1-2 days will create
a smoother transition and support enteric health.
Finisher Feed
Finisher feeds are generally fed after 25 days of age.
To optimize profitability, broilers grown to ages beyond
42 days will require an additional finisher feed(s). The decision
on the number of broiler finisher feeds to include will depend
upon the desired age and weight at processing and feed
manufacturing capabilities. Broiler finisher feeds account for
most of the total feed intake and cost of feeding a broiler.
Therefore, finisher feeds must be designed to optimize
financial return for the type of product being produced.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

Withdrawal Period
Depending on local laws and regulations, a withdrawal
feed will be required when regulated pharmaceutical feed
additives are used. The main reason a withdrawal feed
is used is to provide sufficient time prior to processing
to eliminate the risk of pharmaceutical product residues
occurring in the meat products. Producers are advised to
refer to product instructions to determine the withdrawal
time required. To maintain bird growth and welfare,
extreme dietary nutrient reductions are not recommended
during the withdrawal period.
Separate Feeding of Male and Female Broilers
When male and female broilers are grown separately, there
may be an opportunity to increase profitability by using
different feeding programs. The most practical method is to
use the same feeds for both sexes but shorten the grower
feeding period for the females. It is strongly recommended
that the amount or duration of starter feed is kept the same
for both sexes to ensure optimal early development.
KEY POINTS
A high-quality starter feed should be fed for at least
10 days to optimize early growth and development.
Decisions on starter feed formulation should be based
on performance and overall profitability, not feed costs.
The grower feed must support dynamic growth during
this period.

Feed Form and Physical Feed Quality
Broiler growth is the result of dietary nutrient content and
feed intake. Feed intake is affected by feed form. The best
feed intake occurs on good-quality crumble or pellets.
Feed particle size may increase feed wastage since the
smaller particles easily fall from the birds’ beaks. Chicks
consuming higher levels of fines (particles below 1 mm
[0.04 in] in length) or mash feed will waste more feed and
lead to increased water consumption. Feed spillage and
wastage will substantially reduce calculated feed efficiency.
Starter feeds are usually fed as crumble, subsequent
feeds are usually fed as pellets. Further details on the
characteristics of these feed textures are provided in
Table 5.1, and Figure 5.1 illustrates good-quality
feed textures.
Table 5.1
Feed form and recommended particle size by age
in broilers.
Age
(days)

Feed
Form

Particle size

0–10

Crumble

2–3.5 mm (0.08–0.14 in) diameter

11–18

Pellet

3–5 mm (0.12–0.20 in) diameter
5–7 mm (0.20–0.28 in) length

19–finish

Pellet

3–5 mm (0.12–0.20 in) diameter
6–10 mm (0.24–0.40 in) length

Finisher feeds should be fed after 25 days of age and
designed to optimize financial return for the product
being produced.

Figure 5.1
A good-quality sieved crumble, pellet, and mash feeds (left, middle and right).

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

53

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

Broiler growth and feed efficiency are
improved by pelleting feed. These
performance improvements are
attributed to:

Figure 5.2
Light over the sensor pan.

Reduced feed wastage.
Reduced selective feeding.
Reduced ingredient segregation.
Reduced time and energy
expended on eating.
Destruction of pathogenic
organisms.
Improved feed palatability.

Poor-quality and inconsistent sizes
of crumble or pellets will result in
reduced feed intake, poorer biological
performance, and increased body
weight variation. When dusty feed or
feed with a high percentage of fines
(<1 mm [0.04 in]) is provided, the birds
have to spend more time at the feeders
and, therefore, potentially limit other
birds access to the feeders. This results
in variations in growth and nutrient
intake. On the farm, attention should
be given to managing feed distribution
to minimize physical deterioration in
crumble and pellets, including:
Limit unnecessary auger runs.

Figure 5.3
Example of a feed shaker sieve.

Reduce the number of track runs.
Use a light over the sensor pan
(Figure 5.2) to attract birds and
encourage pan clearing.

Testing Physical Feed Quality
The physical quality of feed is practically
assessed based on the size of feed
particles at the point of presentation to
the birds. It is often difficult to assess
this on the farm, where subjective
opinions can lead to a poor description
of feed texture. Aviagen has developed
a method to measure feed quality
using a shaker sieve device that
quantifies the particle size distribution
of feed in a straightforward and easily
observable manner (Figure 5.3). Using
this approach also allows a quantitative
comparison to be carried out between
feed deliveries or flocks at the farm level.

54

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

AviaTech: Feed Physical Quality — Effects of Feed Texture on
Biological and Economic Performance

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

The sample taken should represent the physical feed quality
that is presented to the birds; that is, samples should be
taken from the feed that enters the feeders at various points
along the feeder lines. Additionally, it is recommended to
take samples from different time points (beginning, middle,
and end) from a feed delivery. The Aviagen feed sieve
comes with instructions for use.

Where producers are not able to pellet feed, the mash
feed produced should be sufficiently coarse and of a
uniform particle size. The aim with a mash feed should
be to minimize the amount of particularly fine (<1 mm
[<0.04 in]) material. This will aid physical feed quality and
allow for better flowability during transport and distribution.
KEY POINTS

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Use good-quality crumbled and pelleted feeds for
optimum performance.

Video: Feed Sieve Demo

Broiler How To 7: Take a Representative
Feed Sample on Farm using a Sampling
Spear

Particle Size Profile
The recommended particle size distributions for crumble
and pellets are shown in Table 5.2. Trials have shown that
>10% fines (<1 mm [0.04 in]) results in a reduction in body
weight and poorer FCR. Therefore, the aim should be to
minimize the amount of fine particles (<1 mm [0.04 in])
in all feed stages.
Table 5.2
Recommended particle size distribution for
crumble or pelleted feeds.
0–10 days

11–18 days

19–finish

Crumble

Pellet

Pellet

>3 mm
(0.12 in)

<20%

>80%

>80%

1-3 mm
(0.04–0.12 in)

70%

10%

10%

<1 mm
(0.04 in)

<10%

<10%

<10%

Form

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Poor physical feed quality will have a negative impact
on broiler performance and uniformity.

When feeding mash, ensure a coarse and uniform
particle size is achieved.

Whole-Grain Feeding
The practice of offering broilers a mixture of compound feed
(pellets) and whole wheat is most common in regions such
as Europe, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia. Any whole
cereal grain, except corn, can be used for this purpose.
In some regions, a blend of whole and cracked wheat is
an alternative when segregation is a concern.
Consider whole grain inclusion levels carefully when
formulating compound feed to ensure optimal growth
and efficiency. Together, the compound feed and whole
grain supply the bird’s nutrient requirements. Broilers
respond to the balanced protein (BP) level in their diet,
and if whole-grain inclusion exceeds what the compound
or balancer feed accounts for, birds may show reduced
growth, poorer FCR, reduced breast meat yield, and
increased fat content. Therefore, both the quantity of
whole grain used and the composition of the compound
(or balancer) feed must be considered carefully.
Adding whole-grain after pelleting or on the farm reduces
feed manufacturing costs, potentially lowers transport
expenses, and can support a smoother nutrient transition
during the growing period. Whole grain feeding promotes
healthier gut microflora, enhances gut function and
digestive efficiency, and can improve litter conditions.
There is also evidence suggesting that whole-grain
feeding may increase resistance to coccidiosis. However,
these benefits must be weighed against potential
reductions in carcass and breast meat yield. It is
recommended to treat whole grain with organic acids
to control Salmonella spp.

55

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

Caution must also be exercised when using an anticoccidial
or other pharmaceutical products in the feed to ensure legal
usage levels (as defined by local laws and regulations) are not
violated. Safe inclusion guides for whole grains are given in
Table 5.3.

For protein, emphasis should be placed on enhancing
AA digestibility rather than simply increasing AA density.
Minimizing excess protein and balancing AA with
supplemental AA, rather than intact proteins, helps
prevent additional metabolic heat production.

Table 5.3
Safe inclusion levels of whole grain in broiler rations.

Severe heat-related stress, indicated by elevated respiratory
rates (e.g., severe panting) and increased core body
temperature, results in:

Form

Inclusion rate of whole grain

Starter

Zero

Grower

Gradual increase to 15–20%

Finisher

Gradual increase to 25–30%

These guidelines should be used together with the
recommended Broiler Nutrition Specifications.

Whole grain must be removed from the feed 2 days
before catching to avoid issues of contamination during
evisceration at the processing plant.
KEY POINTS
Proper adjustment of nutrient levels in compound
feed ensures broiler performance and profitability with
whole-grain feeding.
Whole-grain feeding reduces feed costs but requires
careful management to avoid yield loss.
The grain must be of good quality, free from fungal/
toxin contamination, comply with legal pharmaceutical
product usage levels, be treated for Salmonella, and
removed 2 days before processing.

Feeding Under High Environmental
Temperatures
Correctly balanced nutrient levels, together with the use of
feed ingredients with higher digestibility, will help minimize
the effects of high environmental temperatures.
Providing optimum feed form (good-quality crumble,
pellet or mash) will minimize the energy expended to
consume feed and thereby reduce the heat generated
during feeding. Optimum feed form will also increase
compensatory feed intake during the cooler periods
of the day or night. It is usually best to encourage
compensatory feed intake at night.

Increased urinary and fecal excretion of minerals
and trace elements.
An abnormally high loss of blood CO2.
A decline in blood bicarbonate and an increase
in blood pH.

Heat-related stress may create a metabolic need for
bicarbonate. Under these conditions, birds can benefit from
diets containing sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3) or sodium
sesquicarbonate, supplying Na3H(CO3)2 approximately
50% of the dietary Na. Additionally, maintaining a dietary
electrolyte balance (DEB), defined as Na + K - Cl, between
220–240 mEq/kg, can help reduce heat-related mortality
and support growth during hot weather.
The strategic use of vitamins A, C, D, E, and niacin may
help the birds deal with high environmental temperatures.
Therefore, vitamin supplementation should be increased—
provided legal limits defined by local laws and regulations
are not exceeded—to offset the anticipated decline in feed
intake during periods of hot weather.
In heat-related stress, select anticoccidials carefully, avoiding
those linked to increased mortality from heat production or
those affecting Na or K metabolism.
KEY POINTS
Providing the correct balanced nutrient levels and
using more digestible ingredients will help to minimize
the effects of heat stress.
Optimal physical feed form will minimize the effects
of high temperatures and aid feed intake.
Ensure birds have access to feed during the cooler
part of the day.
Provide good-quality, fresh, and cool water.
Consider the strategic use of vitamins and electrolytes to
help the birds deal with the effects of high temperatures.

During hot weather, increasing the proportion of dietary
energy from fats rather than carbohydrates can be
beneficial, as fat metabolism generates less heat.

56

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

Drinking and Feeding Systems
Drinking Systems
Birds should have unlimited access to clean, fresh,
good-quality drinking water at all times. Any water intake
control needs to be managed with care; there must be
no restriction on the amount of water offered to growing
birds, and a balance must be found between growth,
welfare, and potential FPD risk. Inadequate water
supply, either in volume or in the number of drinkers, will
result in a reduced growth rate. To ensure that the flock
receives sufficient water, monitor the daily water-to-feed
consumption ratio or measure liters (L) or gallons (gal)
per 1,000 birds. Changes in water intake can be an early
indication of health and performance issues. It's important
to note that not all water entering the shed is consumed
by the birds; some may be lost due to spillage. Water
usage = water consumed by the birds + water spillage.
Water consumption should be monitored daily using
a water meter. Water meters must match flow rates with
pressure. It is good practice to use a water meter that
measures water flow at low pressures to ensure that
accurate measurements of water intake occur, even for
chicks and young birds. A minimum of one water meter
is required per house, but preferably, more should be
installed to allow within-house zoning.
Water requirements will vary depending on feed
consumption, the environment, and water quality.
At 21°C (69.8°F), birds are consuming sufficient water
when the ratio of water volume (L) to feed weight (kg)
remains close to 1.6–1.8.
Water requirements will also vary with ambient temperature.
Birds will drink more water at higher ambient temperatures.
Each 1°C (1.8°F) rise above 21°C (69.8°F) increases water
requirements by about 6.5%. In tropical areas, prolonged
high environmental temperatures will double daily water
consumption. In hot weather, it is good practice to flush the
drinker lines at regular intervals to ensure that water does
not get too warm and to reduce biofilm formation.
Water temperature may also affect water consumption
(see Table 2.2).

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Adequate water storage must be provided on the
farm in case the main supply fails. Ideally, sufficient
storage to provide 24 hours of water at maximum
consumption is required.
All drinkers should be checked for height daily and
adjusted if necessary. They should also be maintained
in clean condition, free from litter and fecal material,
and in good working order. During the house clean-out
process, any buildup of Ca deposits should be removed
using a suitable cleaning product.
Water Quality
In regions where good-quality water is not readily
available, it is often necessary to treat it with chlorine
or ultraviolet light before birds consume it. The
subsection on Water Quality in Section 7 provides
further information on water treatment and quality.
Nipple Drinkers
Minimum nipple drinker requirements post-brooding
are given in Table 5.4.
The actual number of birds per nipple will depend on
flow rates, depletion age, climate, and nipple design.
To obtain optimum performance, water lines need to
be managed daily (height, water pressure, cleanliness,
and working order) throughout the flock's life.
Table 5.4
Minimum drinker requirements post-brooding.
Drinker Type

Nipple

Requirements
< 3 kg (6.6 lb)
12 birds per nipple
> 3 kg (6.6 lb)
9 birds per nipple

Nipple lines should be flushed 1–2 hours prior to
placement and twice daily for the first 4 days to ensure
the chicks are supplied with cool, fresh water.
The height of the drinker lines should be highly
accessible at the beginning of the flock and increase as
the birds age. Drinker lines that are too high for the birds
age can restrict water consumption, while water lines
that are too low can result in wet litter.

Aviagen Brief: Water Utilization in Broilers

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

57

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

In the initial stages of brooding, nipples should be placed at the birds’ eye level so that they can see water droplets
(Figure 5.4). The back of the chick should form an angle of 35–45° with the floor while drinking. As the bird grows, the
nipples should be raised so that the back of the bird forms an angle of approximately 75–85° with the floor and so that
the neck is stretching slightly for the water (Figure 5.5). Birds should be reaching for, but not stretching their backs or
straining to reach the nipple, so that water will flow directly from the nipple into the beak. The birds’ feet should remain on
the ground during this time. If the nipple is too low, birds may turn their heads to drink, causing water to fall onto the litter.
For ease of access and optimum water availability, birds should, where possible, be grown using a 360° type nipple.
This is particularly important where large birds (>3 kg/6.6 lb) are being grown.
Figure 5.4
Correct nipple drinker height for birds under 7 days old (bird’s back-to-floor angle: 35–45°).

Figure 5.5
Correct nipple drinker height after 7 days (bird’s back-to-floor angle: 75–85°).

58

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

Flow Rates
Nipple drinker flow rates should be checked on a weekly
basis during the growing cycle to ensure that the water
supply is high enough to meet maximum demands for daily
water intake. Nipple drinker flow rates can be measured by
pressing a measuring cylinder onto a nipple (Figure 5.6) in
at least three locations along the nipple line to activate the
flow of water through the nipple for one minute. The amount
of water in the measuring cylinder indicates the flow rate
through each nipple per minute. A higher-than-expected
flow rate for age may increase leakage, thus related to wet
litter problems. A lower-than-expected flow rate may not
allow enough water for all birds to drink, leading to problems
with dehydration. Measuring the static flow rate of a nipple
can help to identify problems within drinking systems. When
measuring the flow rate, make sure these flow rates are
achieved when all the birds are drinking. It is also essential
that the measurement is made along the nipple line and that
the uniformity of flow rates is considered.
Recommended flow rates for particular ages are given
in Table 5.5, but it is important that the manufacturer’s
recommendations are followed for the specific type of
nipple being used. If there is a slope on the house floor,
slope regulators should be placed on the nipple lines
following the manufacturer's recommendations to adjust
flow rates to avoid wet litter. Uniformity of flow rates, water
consumption, and bird behavior should be monitored
to ensure they are receiving adequate water.
Figure 5.6
Measuring nipple line flow rates.

Table 5.5
Recommended flow rates at a particular age
for broilers.
Bird Age (Days)

Water Intake
ml/min (oz/min)

0–7

20–29 (0.68–0.98)

8–14

30–39 (1.01–1.32)

15–21

40–49 (1.35–1.66)

22–28

50–69 (1.69–2.33)

>28

70–100 (2.37–3.38)

These rates are only guidelines. Follow the manufacturer’s
guide and closely monitor the uniformity of flow rate, water
consumption, and birds’ behavior.

Bell Drinkers
At placement, a minimum of 6 bell drinkers (40 cm/
15.7 in diameter) should be provided per 1,000 chicks.
Bell drinkers should be filled with water 1–2 hours
prior to chick placement; this will ensure the water
remains fresh and free from contamination and that the
water temperature is adequate when the chicks arrive
(Table 2.2).
As the broilers become older and the area of the house
in use is expanded, the number of bell drinkers per
1,000 should be increased (Table 5.6). These should be
placed evenly throughout the house so that no broiler
has to travel more than 2 m (6.6 ft) to gain access to
water. As a guide, the water level should be 0.6 cm
(0.24 in) below the top of the drinker until approximately
7–10 days of age. After 10 days of age, there should be
1 cm (0.39 in) of water in the base of the drinker.
To prevent spillage, bell drinkers should have a ballast
fitted to keep them level.
Additional mini-drinkers and trays used during brooding
should be gradually removed so that by 3 to 4 days,
all chicks are drinking from the automatic drinkers.
Minimum drinker requirements per 1,000 birds
post-brooding are given in the table below.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Broiler How To 8: Measure Nipple Drinker
Flow Rate

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Table 5.6
Minimum drinker requirements post-brooding.
Drinker Type

Requirements

Bell

8 drinkers (40 cm/
15.7 inches in diameter)
per 1,000 birds

59

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

Drinkers should be checked for height daily and adjusted so that the base of each drinker is level with the top of the
breast from day 18 onward, see Figure 5.7. A checklist for monitoring water intake is provided in Table 5.7.
Figure 5.7
Correct height of bell drinker.

Table 5.7
Water intake checklist.
Action
Are waterlines too high or too low?
Is pressure correct everywhere in the
house?
Are the birds healthy?
Is there evidence of water leakage?
Are water flow rates uniform throughout
the house?

KEY POINTS
Yes/No?

Make drinking water available to the birds 24 hours a day.
Provide adequate drinking space and ensure that
drinkers are easily accessible to all birds.
Monitor the feed-to-water ratio daily to check that water
intake is sufficient.
Make allowances for increased water consumption at
high environmental temperatures.
Flush drinker lines in hot weather to ensure that the
water is as cool as possible.
Adjust drinker heights daily.
Keep drinkers in a state of good repair.

60

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

Feeding Systems
For the first 10 days of life, feed should be provided in
the form of sieved crumble. The feed should be placed
in flat trays or on paper sheeting so that it is readily
accessible to the chicks. At least 70% of the floor should
be covered with paper. Automatic feeding systems
should be flooded with feed at chick placement, allowing
easier access to the starter feed. A total feed amount
of approximately 40 g (1.41 oz) per chick should be
measured out and fed on the paper immediately prior to
chick placement. To encourage chick feeding behavior,
top up the feed on the paper at regular intervals during
the first 3–4 days of age. The target should be to get
chicks transferred onto the main feeding system as quickly
as possible.
The change to the main feeding system should be made
gradually from day 4–5 as chicks begin to show more and
more interest in the main feeding system. Transition to the
main feeding system should be complete by day 6–7, and
any supplementary feeders should be removed by 7 days
of age. When the transition to the main feeding system
is complete, feed should gradually be changed from
crumble to a good-quality pellet. Note that birds should
not receive full pellets (3–4 mm, 0.12–0.16 in) before
11 days of age.
Actual diets provided to the birds will depend on live
weight, depletion age, climate, and type of house and
equipment construction.

Table 5.8 shows typical feeding systems and recommended
feeding space per bird. Insufficient feeding space will reduce
growth rates and, cause poor uniformity, and can increase
carcass condemnations at processing age. The number of
birds per feeding system will ultimately depend on the live
weight at processing and design of the system.
Table 5.8
Feeding space per bird for different feeder types.
Feeder Type

Feeding Space

Pan

45–80 birds per pan (the lower ratio
for birds >3.5 kg [7.7 lb]).

Flat Chain/
Auger*

2.5 cm/bird (0.98 in/bird)

Tube

70 birds/tube
(for a 38 cm/15.0 in diameter)

*Birds fed on both sides of the track.

All types of feeders should be adjusted to ensure
minimum spillage and optimum access for the birds.
The lip of the pan should be at the top of the breast
(Figure 5.8). The height of pan and tube feeders may
have to be adjusted individually. The height of chain
feeders is adjustable by winch or feeder leg adjustment.

Figure 5.8
Correct height of feeders.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

61

SECTION 5

PROVISION OF FEED AND WATER

CONTENTS

Incorrect feeder height (too high/too low) will increase feed spillage. In addition to economic loss and reduced performance,
estimates of feed conversion will become inaccurate, and the spilled feed, when eaten, is likely to carry a higher risk of
bacterial contamination. In addition, if feeders are too low, birds will remain close to them, which reduces uniformity of feed
accessibility and increases the risk of skin scratches.
The feed should be distributed equally and uniformly throughout the feeding system to allow equal opportunity for all
birds to eat at the same time. Uneven feed distribution can result in lowered performance, reduced uniformity of birds at
processing, increased scratching damage associated with competition at feeders, and increased feed spillage. To ensure
equal feed distribution, all depth adjustment settings should be set the same on every feed pan or tube. Pan and tube
feeder systems may require adjustments to be made to each individual feeder. Adjustment of feed depth is easier with
chain feeder systems, as only a single adjustment to the hopper is required. Careful maintenance of chain feeders will
minimize the incidence of leg damage to birds.
When managed correctly, pan and tube feeders (if filled automatically) have the advantage of all being filled simultaneously,
making feed available to the birds immediately. The automated system should be regularly checked to confirm that pans
or tubes are being filled correctly.
When chain feeders are used, feed distribution takes longer to accomplish, and feed is not immediately available to all
the birds. In the early stages of the growing period, chain feeders should be monitored closely and run whenever the
feed level becomes too low (feeders should only be empty if they are being cleared out—see paragraph below). Chain
feeders will need to be run more frequently throughout the day as birds get older and eat faster to keep feed topped
up. The key to good chain feeder management is regular monitoring of feed depth and bird behavior.
With all feeding systems, it is good practice to allow the birds to clear the feeders once daily by consuming all the feed
available in the tracks or pans from days 10–12. This will reduce feed wastage, resulting in improved feed efficiency.
Once the feeders have been cleared, the system should be turned on immediately, and the feeders should be refilled.
Attention should be given to avoid birds going without feed for longer than necessary to clear the pans.
KEY POINTS
Supplement the main feeding system using paper and/or trays over the first 3 days.
Supply sufficient feeders for the number of birds in the house and final processing weight.
Adjust feeder height daily so that the lip of the feeder is level with the top of the breast.
Clear feeders daily from days 10–12 to reduce waste and improve efficiency, and refill them immediately once empty to
minimize feed gaps.

62

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Section 6: Environmental Requirements
Housing
Objective
To provide an environment in which temperature, humidity, ventilation, and light intensity can be controlled and
optimized to achieve optimum performance in growth rate, uniformity, feed efficiency, and yield while ensuring the
health and welfare of the bird are not compromised.

Principles
Farm location and house design must take into consideration climate and management systems.

Farm Location and Design
A farm's location and design (Figure 6.1) will be affected by several factors, including local economics and regulations.
Figure 6.1
Examples of typical farm layouts and locations showing good biosecurity.

Climate
The temperature and humidity ranges experienced in the natural climate will influence the type of housing that is most
suitable (i.e., open- or closed-sided) and the degree of environmental control required.
Local Planning Laws and Regulations
Local planning laws and regulations may stipulate significant constraints in design (e.g., height, color, and materials)
and should be consulted at the earliest opportunity. They may also dictate a minimum distance from existing farms.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

63

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Biosecurity
The size, relative situation, and design of houses should
minimize the transmission of pathogens between and
within flocks. A policy of single- (as opposed to multi-)
aged sites is preferable. House design must facilitate
effective clean-out procedures between flocks
(see section on Health and Biosecurity).
Access
The farm location must allow heavy vehicles such as feed
and transport trucks to easily access the site perimeter
(i.e., road widths and turning circles must be appropriate
for the vehicles servicing the farm).
Local Topography and Prevailing Winds
These natural features are particularly important for
open-sided housing. They can be exploited to minimize the
entry of direct sunlight and for optimal ventilation or cooling.
Open-sided houses should be positioned so that the
length of the house is oriented in an East-West direction to
minimize solar heat gain through the sidewall. The existence
of sites nearby that present an airborne disease risk must
also be considered. It is best to build a farm in an isolated
area at least 3.2 km (2 mi) from the nearest poultry or other
livestock facility that may contaminate the farm.
Figure 6.2
Example of a backup generator.

Power Availability and Costs
All poultry houses require a reliable power source
for electrical ventilation, heating, lighting, and feeding
equipment. A backup system/generator (Figure 6.2)
and an appropriate alarm system must be installed in
case of power failure. The best practice is to test the
backup system at full capacity at regular intervals.
Water
A clean and fresh supply of water is required. For more
information on maximum acceptable concentrations
of minerals and bacteria in the water supply, see Water
Quality in Section 7.
Drainage
Farm design features should allow for the separate
disposal of rainwater and house cleanout water.
This separation is a necessary part of biosecurity and
environmental protection. Please refer to local laws
and regulations regarding the correct water disposal
procedures.
KEY POINTS
Farm design will depend on location, climate, and local
planning laws and regulations.
Farm location checklist:
• Biosecurity.
• Access.
• Local topography and prevailing winds.
• Availability of power and water.

64

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

House Design
Controlled-Environment Housing
Controlled-environment (blackout) housing is preferred
over open-sided housing since it limits variation due
to environmental influences, permits greater control
of activity and body weight, and assists in producing
uniform flocks.
Fire Prevention/Control
House design should be planned in such a way as to
minimize fire risk.
Size and Number of Houses
In determining the size and number of broiler
houses, the following should be considered:
The floor area required for the number of birds at the
recommended stocking density.
The time required for house cleaning and disinfection.
The preferred/optimum individual house size
(determined by the need to maintain the birds in an
appropriate environment by effectively managing the
ventilation within the house).
The number of houses that the site can accommodate.
The house type.

Stocking Density
Stocking density depends on local laws and regulations,
climate, equipment and local economics.
House Size
The selected house size must enable the daily feed
allowance to be evenly distributed. Review the layout
of the feeding system while considering the feed hopper
position, timer settings, and sensor pan activation.
Avoid chicks traveling more than 2 m (6.6 ft) to access
feed and water. This condition should be met for each
pen/population within the house.
Lighting
Lighting should be uniformly distributed throughout
the house. Light intensities and durations must meet
recommendations (see subsection on Lighting). Both
should be controllable and adjustable. An appropriate
light meter can be used to measure light intensity across
the house at bird height.
Light intensity should not exceed 0.4 lux (0.04 fc) during
the dark period. This light intensity must be achievable at
all stages of ventilation system operation.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Insulation
Insulation aids the effective operation of the ventilation
system. The amount of insulation required will depend
primarily on the local ambient conditions in summer
and winter and is subject to local laws and regulations.
Airtightness
Most modern poultry housing systems utilize
negative-pressure ventilation. For the ventilation
system to work effectively, the house must be
well-sealed to prevent any uncontrolled air leaks into
it (i.e., the house must be airtight). Consider airtightness
during the design and construction of the house.
Give care to the tunnel ventilation inlet, as this is
often the house area with the most air leakage.
Ambient Conditions
The local ambient climatic conditions will determine
the type and size of the ventilation system required
to maintain acceptable house conditions for the birds
(see subsection on Ventilation for more details).
Heating
In most climates worldwide, a heating system is required
to keep the house at the desired set-point temperature
in colder months, especially during brooding. Examples
of different types of heating equipment are shown in
Figure 6.3. The heating equipment required will depend
on local climate, house design, and local energy availability.
The heating system must maintain desired house
temperature during colder periods and meet minimum
ventilation needs. Heat must be uniformly distributed
throughout the house and should be operated in
combination with the main ventilation control system.
During the early stages of the production cycle, heating
should be set to operate close to but not on the required
house set-point temperature. As the birds grow older and
generate more body heat, the difference between the
house set-point temperature and the temperature at which
the heaters come on can be increased. For example,
the heater may be set only to operate if the house
temperature falls 1–2°C (1.8–3.6°F) below the house
set-point. These decisions and settings must be based
on the observed reaction and comfort of the birds as
assessed by bird behavior.
Heating systems
Heating systems can be separated into direct and indirect
heater types. Direct-fired heaters force air directly through
the flame of the heater. Although this is a very efficient way
to heat cold air, it increases moisture, CO2, and CO in the
heated environment. When preheating or heating a house
with direct-fired heaters, running a minimum ventilation
rate to exchange the air and prevent the build-up of
harmful gaseous by-products in the house is essential.

65

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Figure 6.3
Examples of different house heating systems: canopy brooder (A), box heater (B), space heater (C) and
hot water air heater (D).

A

B

C

D

A recommended ventilation rate from the manufacturer will
be displayed on the heater; this is the minimum ventilation
rate that should be used when preheating the house.
Radiant heaters can also be classified as direct-fired
heating. They use a flame to heat ceramic components
that radiate the heat down onto the house floor. This
is very useful during the brooding period when it is
important to maintain a warm litter temperature.
Indirect heaters flow heated air through a chamber
known as a heat exchanger. This process heats the
structure of the heat exchanger. The house air, moisture,
CO2, and CO are vented outside via a chimney or duct.
The cold air enters the house, passes over or around
the heat exchanger's outer surface, and is heated. This
method of heating is less efficient than direct heating.

66

Underfloor heating is a form of central heating that can be
used in a poultry house. This method is unique because
the space is warmed from the ground up via hydronic or
electrical heating elements built directly into the poultry house
floor, which heat the area through conduction, convection,
and radiation. Underfloor heating is especially effective in
maintaining litter temperature during the brooding period.
Hot water heating systems, also known as hydronic
systems, distribute heat in hot water, which gives up
heat as it passes through radiators or other devices
throughout the house.
Regardless of which heating system is used, it
is essential to have a uniform distribution of heat
throughout the bird area of the house. The main
ventilation controller should control heaters as well as
ventilation. The temperature at which they will turn on
and off should be carefully set based on bird age and
ensure there is no conflict between the operation of the
heaters and the fans.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Biosecurity (see Health and Biosecurity)

KEY POINTS

In designing the structure of the house:

Use materials that provide easily cleanable surfaces.

House design checklist:

Smooth concrete floors are easier to wash and disinfect.

• Environmental management
type (controlled/natural).

Keep an area of concrete or gravel extending to a width of 1–3 m (3.3–9.9 ft)
free of vegetation around the house, as this will discourage rodent entry.
Make sure the house is proofed against access by wild birds.

• Bird numbers and stocking
density.
• Lighting and light proofing.

In designing the layout of the farm:

• Insulation.
• Heating.

Provide shower facilities for staff and visitors entering and leaving the farm.

• Biosecurity.

If vehicles are to enter the farm (which is not desirable), then a spray booth
or equivalent should be available to disinfect the vehicles.

• Ventilation.

Locate feed bins along the fenceline so that feed trucks do not need to enter
the farm.

Ventilation
Objective
To ensure that good welfare and biological performance
are achieved by maintaining birds under appropriate
and, where possible, optimal environmental conditions.

Principles
The ventilation system is a tool that should be used
to create an in-house environment that optimizes bird
comfort, achieves the best biological performance, and
ensures good bird health and welfare conditions.
It supplies adequate fresh air and removes excess
moisture, gases, and airborne by-products. It also
contributes to temperature and humidity control in ambient
conditions and provides more uniform house conditions
than open-sided housing. Monitoring bird behavior is
an essential part of managing the ventilation system.
One of the main objectives of ventilating a house is to
ensure bird comfort. In addition to thermometer/sensor
readings, visible bird comfort and behavior are the best
indicators of how well the ventilation system operates.
Ideally, the entire ventilation system should be automated
to provide the best environment for the birds year-round.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Ventilation How To 1: Calibrate an
In‑House Fluid-Filled Pressure Meter

Ventilation How To 2: Measure House
Air Tightness

Ventilation How To 3: Measure Fan
Capacity

Environmental Management in the
Broiler House

Essential Ventilation Management

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

67

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Air

Housing and Ventilation Systems

The main air contaminants within the house environment
are dust, NH3, CO2, CO, and excess water vapor
(Table 6.1). Levels of these contaminants must be kept
within legal limits at all times. Continued and excessive
exposure to these contaminants can:

There are two basic types of ventilation systems:

Damage the respiratory tract.
Decrease the efficiency of respiration.
Trigger disease (e.g., ascites or chronic respiratory disease).
Affect temperature regulation.
Contribute to poor litter quality.
Reduce bird performance.

Table 6.1
Effects of common broiler house air contaminants.
Ammonia

Ideal level <10 ppm.
Can be detected by smell at 20 ppm
or above.
>10 ppm will damage lung surface.
>20 ppm will increase susceptibility to
respiratory diseases.
>25 ppm may reduce growth rate
depending upon temperature and age.

Carbon
Dioxide

Ideal level <3,000 ppm.

Carbon
Monoxide

Ideal level <10 ppm.

Dust

Damage to respiratory tract lining and
increased susceptibility to disease.
Dust levels within the house should
be kept to a minimum.

Humidity

Ideal level 50–60% after brooding.

>3,500 ppm causes ascites.
Carbon dioxide is fatal at high levels.

Natural Ventilation (Open-Sided, Curtain-Sided
Housing)
These houses usually have minimal or no walls on
certain sides, allowing for direct exposure to the
surrounding environment.
Fans may be used inside the house to circulate and
move air.

Power Ventilation (Controlled-/Closed-Environment
Housing)
These houses usually have solid sidewalls or curtains
that are kept closed during house operation.
Fans and inlets are used to ventilate the house.

Open-Sided/Naturally-Ventilated Housing
Open-sided (or naturally-ventilated) houses rely on the free
flow of air through the house for ventilation (Figure 6.4).
Achieving adequate control of the in-house environment
can be difficult in open-sided houses, and as a result,
consistency and level of performance tend to be lower
than in controlled-environment houses. However,
adequate heating equipment in natural ventilation/
open-sided houses will be helpful for temperature control.
Figure 6.4
Example of an open-sided house.

>50 ppm affects bird health. Carbon
monoxide is fatal at high levels.

Effects vary with temperature. When
temperature is >29°C (84.2°F), if RH
is >70% or <50%, particularly during
brooding, performance will be affected.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Aviagen Booklet: A Guide to Managing
Broilers in Open-Sided Housing

68

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Curtain Management
Air flow in open-sided houses is controlled by varying the
curtain openings. Managing the curtains to maintain bird
comfort is a 24-hour-per-day job and extremely difficult
to get correct.
Curtains should be fastened to the bottom sidewall
and opened from the top down to minimize wind
or drafts blowing directly onto the birds.
If the wind is coming consistently from one side of the
building, the curtain on the side of the prevailing wind
should be opened less than the downwind side to
minimize drafts on the birds.
Curtains should be managed carefully from day 0,
closely monitoring bird behavior, the environment,
and air quality.
For young birds (3–5 days old), the top curtain should
be opened no more than 1 m (3.3 ft). Bird behavior
should determine the exact age at which the top curtain
is opened and the amount it is opened.
The top curtain can be closed if it rains to prevent water
from entering the house and reduce any wind-chill effects.
The bottom curtain can be opened for improved
ventilation and air exchange during the hottest parts
of the day when birds show signs of being hot.

When outside conditions are cold, opening the curtains
even slightly results in the heavy, cold air entering the
house and dropping directly down onto the litter and the
birds. This cold air causes the birds discomfort and can
result in wet litter. At the same time, warmer air escapes
from the house, which results in large temperature
swings and high heating costs.
Circulation Fans
During hot weather, opening the curtains fully without
sufficient wind blowing may still not provide adequate relief
for the birds. Circulation fans (Figure 6.5) can also help
in this situation by creating air movement over the birds,
giving them some relief through the wind-chill effect.
Circulation fans, if installed, are often hung down the center
of the house, but a better installation is to hang them close
to the sidewall or curtain so that they draw cooler, fresh
(less humid) air from outside the house.
Figure 6.5
Layouts of circulation fans: positioned in the
center (left) or near the sidewall/curtain (right).

Circulation fans can be used to supplement natural
ventilation and enhance temperature control within
the house.
Translucent curtain materials allow the use of natural
light during daylight hours. Blackout curtains are used in
situations where it is necessary to exclude daylight.
However, the curtains should not be completely closed
due to ventilation restrictions.
Achieving adequate ventilation during hot weather can be
difficult in open-sided houses. However, several steps can be
taken to minimize the impact of hot weather. These include:
Reducing flock stocking density.
Insulating the roof to prevent the sun’s radiant solar
heat from reaching the birds. Water can be used to cool
the external roof surface; this strategy must be used
cautiously, as runoff from the roof can increase RH
levels inside the house.
Using circulation fans to create air movement
over the birds.
Using a tunnel ventilation system with evaporative cooling.
Naturally-ventilated houses should be constructed
to a specified width (e.g., 9–12 m [30–40 ft]) and
a minimum height to the eaves of 2.5 m (8.2 ft)
to ensure adequate air flow.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

69

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Fans are usually installed to blow
air diagonally across or through the
house and should not be installed
too close to any solid surface that
may restrict air access to the fan.
They should be placed approximately
10–15 m (32.8–49.2 ft) apart down
the length of the house.
During cold weather, horizontal
circulation fans (installed in the
center of the house) can be used
to help distribute warm air more
uniformly throughout the house
during minimum ventilation and
when the minimum ventilation fans
are not in use (Figure 6.6). They can
effectively bring warm air down to
bird level to help maintain litter and
air quality. However, care must be
taken to ensure these fans do not
create air movement at bird level.
In cool climates, automatic curtain
operation is recommended, with
circulation fans also operated by
timers with thermostat overrides.
However, circulation fans do not
replace a minimum ventilation
system. They only circulate stale air
that is already inside the house.
KEY POINTS
Adequate heating equipment in
houses will help with temperature
control.

Figure 6.6
Circulation fans in an open-sided/naturally-ventilated house.

Closed-/Controlled-Environment Housing
Power ventilation in controlled- or closed-environment houses is the most
popular form of broiler house ventilation system due to its ability to provide better
control of the internal environment under a range of ambient conditions. The
most common form of controlled-environment housing operates under negative
pressure. These houses usually have solid sidewalls and exhaust fans that draw
air out of the house and automated inlets through which fresh air is drawn into
the house (Figure 6.7)
Figure 6.7
Example of controlled-environment housing.

Adjust curtains to respond to
changes in the environment.
Circulation fans should
supplement and enhance
temperature control within the
house. Circulation fans can
create air movement in the house
and improve the uniformity of
conditions throughout. It has
the advantage of creating wind
chill on warm days for additional
cooling.

70

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

To provide the best environment for the bird throughout
the production cycle and at any time of the year, every
closed-environment house should be equipped for the
three stages of ventilation. These are:
Minimum ventilation.
Transitional ventilation.
Tunnel ventilation.

In some regions of the world, ambient temperatures
do not get hot enough to warrant the need for tunnel
ventilation. This stage may be omitted from the house's
design in those regions.
Because closed-environment houses usually have solid
sidewalls, it is strongly advised to link these houses
to standby generators in case of power loss. Standby
generators should be checked regularly for correct
operation. In power-ventilated, curtain-sided houses,
automatic curtain-opening devices should be in place.
KEY POINT
For a negative-pressure system to operate
successfully, the house must be airtight.

Negative Pressure
When the fans are turned off, the pressure inside the
house will be the same as outside. This means that if the
doors or side inlets are opened, the air will not flow into
or out of the house (assuming the wind is not blowing).
In a well-sealed, airtight house, when an extraction fan is
turned on, air will start to leave the house through the fan,
and the pressure inside the house will be different than
that outside the house. The outside pressure will remain
the same as before, but the pressure inside the house will
decrease, becoming less than the outside pressure. In
ventilation terms, this is referred to as “negative pressure.”
In fact, the pressure inside the house is not negative; it is still
positive but less positive than the pressure outside.
When there is negative pressure in the house, air will enter
evenly through all the inlets, including the walls and roof,
in order to equalize the pressure, regardless of where the
fans are situated (Figure 6.8). The greater the negative
pressure (the difference in pressure between outside and
inside the house), the faster the speed of air coming in
through the inlet.
Negative pressure only works efficiently if the house is
effectively sealed. In a house that is effectively sealed
against air leaks, all the air entering the house comes in
through the desired air inlets, and uncontrolled air leakage
will be minimized.

Figure 6.8
The effect of a pressure difference from outside to inside the house. Air tries to enter from all sides to
equalize the pressure difference.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

71

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

This will:
Give better control over where the air will enter the house.
Allow better control over how the air enters the house.
Make it easier to generate negative pressure.

To determine how well-sealed (or airtight) a house is, close
all doors and inlets in the house and turn on one 122 cm
(48 in)/127 cm (50 in) fan or two 91 cm (36 in) fans. The
pressure within the house should not measure less than
3.8 mm (0.15 in) in of water column (37.5 Pa) (Figure 6.9).
Pressure can be measured anywhere in the house and
should be consistent throughout the house for this test.
Check the cleanliness of the pipe when evaluating the
pressure meter and calibrate when needed.
Note: The pressure is based on a house with ±1,850 m²
(19,913 ft2) floor area (e.g., 15 m wide x 123 m long [49 ft
wide x 404 ft long]). Smaller floor areas should achieve
higher test pressure; larger floor areas may be less.

Figure 6.9
A manometer used to monitor air pressure within
the house (the reading given is equivalent to
3.8 mm [0.15 in] of water column [37.5 Pa]).

Never sacrifice air quality for house temperature or
vice versa. Both should be achieved simultaneously,
regardless of ambient conditions. The house must be
well-sealed to eliminate unwanted air leakage for minimum
ventilation to work successfully. It should also have
adequate, well-distributed heating capacity.
During minimum ventilation, hanging strips of lightweight
plastic on feeders and drinkers can be a useful means of
detecting the extent of air movement at bird level. The air
movement at floor/bird level should not exceed 0.15 m/s
(30 ft/min), which is particularly important for young birds.
Minimum Ventilation Layout
The most common minimum ventilation system consists
of numerous sidewall inlets evenly spread along the length
of both sides of the house. The inlets are linked to a
winch, and open and close automatically as determined
by the control system. The inlets in use must be evenly
distributed in order to supply fresh air equally and evenly
throughout the house. They should be installed on a rigid
surface (not on the curtain).
Minimum ventilation exhaust fans are often installed in
the house's sidewall(s). The fans used are usually the
ON/OFF type. Variable-speed fans can be very useful in
fine-tuning the fan capacity to create the desired negative
pressure with the 3–5 cm (1.2–2.0 in) opening of the inlets.
Sometimes, one or more tunnel fans are used, although
this is not always ideal.
The control system operates the minimum ventilation fans
on a cycle timer, but often, the cycle timer may need to
be manually adjusted in order to maintain acceptable air
quality in the house.

Minimum Ventilation
The minimum ventilation system should operate when
the house temperature is at or below the house set-point
temperature (bird comfort temperature) or within 2°C (3.6 °F)
above the set-point (dependent on the age of the birds).
Although minimum ventilation is most often associated
with the brooding period, it can and should be used
whenever the condition described above exists.
The minimum ventilation system serves two purposes.
One is to provide heat to keep the birds comfortable,
and the other is to provide acceptable air quality for the
birds. A very important role of the minimum ventilation
system while providing acceptable air quality is controlling
RH levels inside the house. High RH levels often result in
poor and wet litter conditions. Air quality and temperature
should be uniform throughout the entire house during
minimum ventilation.

72

Heaters should be positioned in order to provide an even
distribution of heat throughout the house. Heaters located
too far apart can create temperature differences in the
house, resulting in higher heating costs.
Using Tunnel Ventilation for Minimum Ventilation
Some houses do not have sidewall inlets and use the
tunnel ventilation system for minimum ventilation. One or
more tunnel fans are used on a cycle timer, and all the air
enters through the tunnel inlet. This is not an acceptable
minimum ventilation system and will not be able to provide
uniform temperature and air quality throughout the house,
as is required during minimum ventilation. This is because
fresh air enters at one end of the house and is moved
slowly, by the cycle timer, down the length of the house.
The colder the outside temperature is, the more difficult it
is to manage this layout, and the more uneven the house
conditions will usually be.
The role of sidewall inlets is to distribute the fresh air and heat
evenly along the length of the house. The chosen type of
total inlet capacity should be matched with the fan capacity
running at the minimum and transition ventilation stages.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Figure 6.10
Example of a good-quality air inlet.

Choosing Minimum Ventilation Inlets
Some important characteristics to look for in
an inlet (Figure 6.10) are:
The inlet should be installed on a rigid surface, not on
the curtain.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Poster: Minimum Ventilation For Broilers

The inlet should seal well when closed. The inlet door
should be insulated.
It should have a mechanism to lock/keep the door
closed when not required to open.
It should have an air direction plate to direct the
incoming air, especially if the house's ceiling has
exposed obstructions.
The inlet door should be set into the inlet frame and
inclined at an angle when closed.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Aviagen Brief: Minimum Ventilation Rates
for Today’s Broiler

Ventilation How To 4: Check Air Inlets are
Opened Correctly for Minimum Ventilation

73

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Using Negative Pressure During Minimum Ventilation
Hot air rises and accumulates at the highest part of a well-sealed and
well-insulated apex. With this in mind, when the cold outside air enters the
house, it will travel along (or close to) the ceiling (Figure 6.11). This will keep
the cold air away from the birds and allow the outside air to mix with the warm
air in that part of the house. As the cold air warms up, the RH of the air will
reduce, making it easier for the air to absorb moisture, thereby helping to
keep the house and litter dry and reducing heating costs.
The differential (negative) pressure can control the air's speed through the inlet.
This speed will determine how far the air will carry into the house and along the
ceiling before it stops and starts flowing down toward the birds (Figure 6.12).
Ideally, controlling the negative pressure inside the house can direct air to travel
from each sidewall to the middle of the house or the apex of the ceiling.

What is the Correct Operating
Pressure for a House?
The negative pressure should create
sufficient incoming air speed to throw
the incoming air to the middle of the
house. The ideal operating negative
pressure of a house during minimum
ventilation will depend on the
following factors:
The width of the house (the
distance the air must travel from
the sidewall to the middle of the
ceiling or apex of the ceiling).

If the pressure difference is insufficient, the air enters slowly through the inlet
and soon drops to the floor inside the house, stressing the birds and possibly
causing wet litter. As the negative pressure increases, the incoming air speed
increases. Negative (differential) pressure can control how far the air will travel
into the house.

The angle of the internal ceiling.

Monitoring the CO2 level in the house is important to assess whether minimum
ventilation is sufficient.

The amount the inlet is opened.

Figure 6.11
Using negative pressure to control air speed.

The shape of the internal ceiling
(smooth or with obstructions).
The type of inlet used.

Guidelines exist for the operating
pressure of different-width
houses, but these will vary based
on the factors given above.

Ideal negative
pressure
Sidewall
air inlet
Incoming air

Higher negative pressure
Better but not ideal
Low negative pressure
Not good

Figure 6.12
Correct air flow during minimum ventilation.

74

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Setting Air Inlets
There are three requirements to get the best performance from house inlets:
1. The minimum-ventilation inlets should be opened at least 3–5 cm (1.2–2.0 in).

For a given pressure, the more the inlet is opened, air will flow better and further into the house. An opening of
3–5 cm (1.2–2.0 in) is recognized as a reasonable guideline. The total number of side inlets in a house is based
on the minimum ventilation requirement. Not all inlets will need to be open at the same time, but those that are
should be uniformly open and distributed throughout the house. If air inlets are open too much or too many are
opened, negative pressure within the house will be reduced and the speed of entering air will be too slow so that it
falls directly onto the birds. As a result, it is common practice to only open every second, third, or even fourth inlet
during minimum ventilation. The inlets should all open equally from the front to the back of the house, and from the
left to the right side.

2. There should be enough negative (differential) pressure.

The negative (differential) pressure should create enough air speed to throw the incoming air along the ceiling to the
middle of the house, or to the apex of the ceiling.

3. The air direction plate should be adjusted correctly.

Proper adjustment of the air direction plate above the inlet door is important to direct the air to the apex of the
ceiling. This is particularly important if there are roof structure beams or any other potential obstruction to the air
flow as it travels to the middle of the house. Therefore, the air direction plate should be set to direct the air parallel
to the ceiling and below any obstructions. The direction plates must be carefully and correctly set. A presentationtype laser pointer with a strong red or green laser beam can be used to help determine if the direction plate is set
correctly. Hold the pointer on the underside of the air direction plate and see where the laser dot hits the ceiling or
obstruction surface. This will give a good indication of the angle at which the direction plate should be set to avoid
obstructions (Figure 6.13). Ensure the direction plate settings are correct after cleaning and disinfection and before
chick arrival. Adjust them when needed during the production cycle.
If the house has a smooth ceiling, a general guideline is to set the air direction plate so that the air makes contact
with the ceiling surface ±0.5–1 m (1.6–3.3 ft) away from the sidewall.

Figure 6.13
Using a presentation laser to determine if the air direction plate is positioned correctly.

Example 1:
Direction plate in wrong position

Example 2:
Direction plate in correct position

Exposed beam
Direction
plate

Exposed beam
Direction
plate

Laser beam indicating
direction of air flow
Laser beam indicating
direction of air flow
Air flow

Air
inlet

Laser pointer

Laser pointer indicates direction plate not in correct position.
Air will be deflected by the beam and fall onto birds.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Air flow

Air
inlet

Laser pointer

Direction plate in correct position. Laser pointer shows air flow
will bypass exposed beam and continue to the ceiling apex.

75

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

How to Check Inlet Set-up
Having sealed the house and set the inlets for minimum
ventilation, verifying the settings by checking the air flow
is important. Three methods are:
1. The “feeling” test
While the minimum ventilation fans are off, stand
2–3 m (6.6–9.8 ft) away and in front of a minimum
ventilation inlet. When the cycle timer fan(s) start to run
until they switch back off, no cold, incoming air flow
should be felt. All air flow should go above head height
and along the ceiling (Figure 6.14). If air flow is felt,
it may mean that the inlet setting should be adjusted.

Figure 6.14
Illustration of air flow into the house. The picture
on the top shows a correct air flow during
minimum ventilation. The picture on the bottom
shows an incorrect air flow during minimum
ventilation.

Example 1:
Correct air flow

2. Smoke test
When smoke-testing a house (Figure 6.15), it is
advisable to do so under worst-case conditions, that
is, when the house is at brooding temperature and
when the ambient temperature is at or close to as
cold as it may get. As long as the air inlets being used
for minimum ventilation are opened an equal amount,
the smoke test can be completed on any inlet. Use a
smoke test (outside the house) to show air entry, or
turn the lights off and stand in the dark to see where
cracks are. Be aware that some smoke generators
emit warm smoke. If testing a house when it is empty
and cold inside, the smoke will try to rise to the peak
of the house even if the pressure is actually too low.

Example 2:
Incorrect air flow

3. Ribbon tape test
Another test method is to hang strips of ribbon
tape about 15 cm (5.9 in) long from the ceiling every
1–1.5 m (3.3–4.9 ft). The first strip is hung ±1 m
(3.3 ft) from the inlet, and every other 1–1.5 m
(3.3–4.9 ft) apart, with the last strip being at the apex
of the ceiling. The strips need only be hung in front
of one inlet to give an indication of how all inlets are
operating. Using an inlet near the entrance of the
house allows one to view the air flow when entering
the house. When the fans are on, the tape closest to
the inlet should show significant movement and will
blow strongly against the ceiling. The movement of
the tape should become less as the air moves further
away from the inlet. The strip hanging at the apex of
the ceiling should move very slightly, indicating that the
air has almost stopped and is starting to flow down
toward the floor. These tapes can remain in place
throughout the production cycle and provide a quick
visual check when entering the house.

76

Figure 6.15
Using a smoke test to determine if air flow and
operating pressure are correct.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Minimum Ventilation Rates
Table 6.2 shows minimum ventilation requirement
guidelines per bird for temperatures between -1
and 16°C (30.2 and 60.8°F). For lower temperatures,
a slightly lower rate may be required, and for higher
temperatures, a slightly higher rate. Fully worked
example calculations are in Appendix 7.

Table 6.2
Approximate minimum ventilation rates per bird.
Average weight
kg (lb)

Ventilation rates
m3/hr (ft3/min)

0.05 (0.11)

0.09 (0.05)

0.10 (0.22)

0.15 (0.09)

0.20 (0.44)

0.26 (0.15)

0.30 (0.66)

0.35 (0.21)

0.40 (0.88)

0.43 (0.26)

0.50 (1.10)

0.51 (0.30)

0.60 (1.32)

0.59 (0.35)

0.70 (1.54)

0.66 (0.39)

0.80 (1.76)

0.73 (0.43)

0.90 (1.99)

0.80 (0.47)

1.00 (2.21)

0.86 (0.51)

When the fans run, the minimum ventilation inlets on the
sidewall should open the correct amount to maintain the
correct negative pressure and direct the incoming air up
to the apex of the ceiling. At the end of the “on” time,
the minimum ventilation fans will turn “off,” and the inlets
should close. When variable-speed fans are used, they
must be able to be set at a proper speed. If fans operate
at low speed, it will cause low house negative pressure,
meaning the inlet opening must be too small (<3 cm
[1.2 in]) to throw the air to the apex of the ceiling.
This is not encouraged.

1.20 (2.65)

0.99 (0.58)

1.40 (3.09)

1.11 (0.65)

1.60 (3.53)

1.23 (0.72)

1.80 (3.97)

1.34 (0.79)

2.00 (4.41)

1.45 (0.86)

2.20 (4.85)

1.56 (0.92)

2.40 (5.29)

1.67 (0.98)

2.60 (5.73)

1.77 (1.04)

During minimum ventilation, the heating system should
operate whenever the house temperature is below the
required set-point temperature, even if the minimum
ventilation fans are running.

2.80 (6.17)

1.87 (1.10)

3.00 (6.62)

1.97 (1.16)

3.20 (7.06)

2.07 (1.22)

3.40 (7.50)

2.16 (1.27)

3.60 (7.94)

2.26 (1.33)

3.80 (8.38)

2.35 (1.39)

4.00 (8.82)

2.44 (1.44)

4.20 (9.26)

2.53 (1.49)

4.40 (9.70)

2.62 (1.55)

4.60 (10.14)

2.71 (1.60)

4.80 (10.58)

2.80 (1.65)

5.00 (11.03)

2.89 (1.70)

The actual air speed at floor/bird level normally is less
than 0.15 m/sec (30 ft/min).
Monitor bird behavior and distribution to make any
necessary adjustments to ensure maximum RH,
CO, CO2, and NH3 levels are not exceeded.
Minimum Ventilation Operation
Minimum ventilation is a period of providing heat to the
house, carefully ventilating to provide acceptable air
quality for the birds, and controlling RH.
Fans operate on a cycle timer to maintain the house
temperature. Good management of the cycle timer
settings determines the air quality and RH in the house.

During the early stages of the production cycle, the
heating set-point is usually set to activate the heaters in
close range to the required house set-point temperature.
For example, the heaters may be set to activate at 0.5°C
(0.9 °F) below the house set-point temperature and
switch back off again slightly below or at the house
set-point temperature.
Because there is often more emphasis on adding heat
to the house during minimum ventilation and the early
stages of the flock cycle, the fans may be set to start
working continuously only if the house temperature
exceeds the set-point by 1–1.5°C (1.8–2.7°F).
These settings will change as the birds grow older.
Typically, the differential between the house set-point
temperature and the heating set-point will increase, and
the differential between the house set-point temperature
and the fan-override temperature will decrease.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

This table should only be used as a guideline, as
actual rates may need to be adjusted to environmental
conditions, bird behavior, and bird biomass (total bird
weight in the house).

77

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Evaluating Minimum Ventilation
Table 6.2 provides minimum ventilation rates based on bird
body weight. The figures given are a guideline only. Their use
does not guarantee acceptable air quality or bird comfort.
Most often, minimum ventilation is more about controlling
RH than providing fresh air for the birds. An increase in house
RH is often the first sign of under-ventilating. In other words, if
a house is ventilated purely by supplying the theoretical “bird
requirements,” the house will often have very high RH levels
and possible wet litter. However, if the house is ventilated
enough to control the RH levels, there will be more than
enough fresh air for the birds.
The best way to evaluate a minimum ventilation rate/
setting is by visually assessing bird comfort, behavior,
and air quality.
When entering the house to evaluate the minimum
ventilation rate, try to do so without disturbing the
birds. The following should be observed:
Spread/Distribution of the Birds:

KEY POINTS
It is essential to provide some ventilation to the house,
regardless of the outside conditions.
Minimum ventilation should operate when the house
temperature is below the house set-point temperature
(bird comfort temperature), or within 2°C (3.6°F) above
the set-point (dependent on the age of the birds).
Minimum ventilation should be timer-driven.
Not all inlets will need to be open at the same time,
but those that are should be uniformly open and
distributed throughout the house. When setting up the
minimum ventilation inlets, the air inlet opening size
should be around 3–5 cm (1.2–2.0 in).
Monitor air flow and the birds' behavior and comfort
to determine if the settings are correct.

Are birds well spread?
Are there specific areas of the house that are being
avoided?

Bird Activity:
Look along drinker lines—is there bird activity at the
drinkers?
Are 1/3 of the birds drinking, 1/3 eating, and 1/3
resting/moving around?
Are birds sitting, huddling together, and showing signs
of being cold?

Air Quality:
During the first 30–60 seconds of entering the house,
ask the following questions:
1. Does it feel stuffy?
2. Is the air quality acceptable?
3. Is humidity too high or too low?
4. Does the house feel too cool or too warm?
The use of instruments capable of measuring RH,
CO2, CO, and NH3 will allow a proper and quantitative
evaluation. For specific air quality recommendations,
see Table 6.1.
If any of the observations made indicate that minimum
ventilation is not adequate, adjustments must be made
to correct this. Try to make an evaluation of the air quality
within the first 60 seconds of entering the house
and before becoming accustomed to the conditions.

78

Transitional Ventilation
Transitional ventilation is used when the house
temperature increases above the desired (or set-point)
temperature, but it is not yet warm enough to use tunnel
ventilation (see subsection on Tunnel Ventilation).
Transitional ventilation is a temperature-driven process.
As the house temperature increases above the required
set-point, the ventilation system should be set to stop
operating minimum ventilation (cycle timer) and start to
ventilate for temperature control (transitional ventilation).
A large volume of air can be introduced into the house
during transitional ventilation. Because the outside
air temperature is still close to the house set-point
temperature or a few degrees above, the air enters
through sidewall inlets and should be directed upward
and along the ceiling to the apex, as in minimum
ventilation.
Transitional Ventilation Layout
During transitional ventilation, the number of sidewall
inlets in use is increased from minimum ventilation
to allow a higher volume of air to enter the house.
The total sidewall inlet capacity (number and size of
inlets) determines the amount of air that can enter the
house and the maximum number of fans that can be
used. During transitional ventilation, the tunnel inlets
must remain closed and the air should enter only
through the sidewall inlets.
Therefore, it is important that the house design
is correct and there is sufficient inlet area.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

If there are too few inlets in the house, it may be necessary
to switch to tunnel ventilation earlier than normal to
ensure excess heat is removed from the house. However,
switching to tunnel ventilation can cause discomfort to
the birds as air will be blowing directly onto them. As a
general guideline for transitional ventilation, there should
be sufficient side inlets to be able to use 40–50% of the
tunnel fan capacity without opening the tunnel inlets.

birds to feel a temperature that is lower than that shown on
the thermometer or temperature probe/sensor.
For any given wind speed, younger birds that are not fully
feathered will feel a greater wind chill than older birds,
making them more prone to wind-chill effects.
Figure 6.16
Typical air movement during transitional ventilation.

Transitional Ventilation Operation
Transitional ventilation works in a similar way to minimum
ventilation. Air inlets operating on the basis of negative
pressure direct the incoming air away from the birds
up to the apex of the house, where it mixes with warm
in-house air before falling back to floor level.
During transitional ventilation, if the temperature continues
to increase above the set-point temperature, more fan
capacity will be required and after all the sidewall fans
are operating continuously, the tunnel fans will also start
to operate. It is acceptable to use only tunnel fans, or
a combination of sidewall and tunnel fans. The tunnel
ventilation inlets remain closed; air only enters through the
sidewall inlets during transitional ventilation (Figure 6.16).
During transitional ventilation, because large volumes of air
may flow into the house for extended periods of time, birds
may feel some air movement. Observing bird behavior (the
distribution of birds in the house and bird activity) will help
to determine if transitional ventilation settings are correct.
If birds are seen sitting down and/or huddling, these are
signs of them being cold and corrective action should be
taken. First, check that the house pressure and the inlet
air flow is correct. If it is, switch off the last fan that came
on and continue to observe bird behavior. If bird activity
improves, continue to monitor the birds for the next 15–20
minutes to be sure there are no further changes in behavior.
The house should be kept in transitional ventilation for
as long as possible before switching to tunnel ventilation.
The decision to switch to tunnel ventilation should
be based on bird behavior (see subsection on Bird
Behavior in Tunnel Ventilation).

Tunnel Ventilation
Tunnel ventilation is used to keep the birds cool.
Figure 6.17 shows a typical tunnel-ventilated house.

Sidewall air inlets

Tunnel air inlets (closed),
sidewall inlets above (open)

Tunnel fans

Minimum ventilation fans (off)

Figure 6.17
Example of a typical tunnel-ventilated house.

The switch from transitional ventilation to tunnel ventilation
should occur when the birds need the cooling effect of
wind chill. When maximum transitional ventilation is used,
but birds cannot maintain comfort, it is time to switch
to tunnel ventilation.
High volumes of air are drawn down the length of the house,
creating an air speed along the house and exchanging the
air in the house quickly. The heat generated by the birds is
removed and a wind-chill effect is created that allows the

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

79

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Tunnel Ventilation Layout
The tunnel ventilation system typically has exhaust fans installed at one end of the house and air inlets at the opposite end.
The system uses fans (usually 122 cm [48 in] or larger) at one end of the house and air inlets at the other end.
The fans must be installed symmetrically (Figure 6.18).
The air inlets should be of equal size (area) in each sidewall of the house. The tunnel ventilation inlets are usually closed
using some sort of hinged door or curtain system. Closing of the inlets must be automated and linked to the control system.
Air Deflector
If air deflectors or baffles (made from solid material like plastic—not shade cloth) are installed down the length of
the house to help improve air speed, the first air deflector or baffle should be placed at the end of the cooling pad.
Thereafter, one air deflector or baffle should be placed every 8–9 m (26.2–29.5 ft) down the length of the house.
The minimum height should be 2 m (6.6 ft) above the litter (Figure 6.19). The lower edge must be parallel to the floor.
There must be no gap between the top of the deflector and the ceiling.
Cooling Pad
If cooling pads are used, they should be installed on a “doghouse” situated outside the tunnel inlets (Figure 6.18).
Figure 6.18
Air flow in a tunnel-ventilated house.
Doghouse

Air flow

Figure 6.19
Example of air deflector/baffle placement in a tunnel-ventilated house.

80

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Migration Fences
In tunnel houses, birds tend to migrate toward the air inlet end in hot conditions. Bird migration disrupts the stocking
density and access to feed and water and impacts the birds' ability to stay cool and comfortable.
Installation of migration fences can help alleviate this issue (Figure 6.20). For example, three fences would typically be used in
a 100 m (328 ft) long house. The fences should be positioned to create equal-sized "pens" within the house.
Migration fences should be installed as soon as possible after the birds have access to the full house and should
remain in place until the flock has been depleted. Birds unevenly distributed will negatively impact litter conditions,
weight gain, feed conversion, condemnation, and uniformity. It is important that the migration fences do not restrict
air flow and that bird distribution and behavior are monitored regularly for signs of overheating.
Wind-Chill Effect
Wind chill is the cooling effect felt by
the birds any time there is air flow
or movement on them. The actual
cooling effect that the birds feel is
the result of the combination
of a number of factors:

Figure 6.20
Example of a migration fence in a broiler house.

The age of the bird — the younger
the bird, the greater the cooling
effect.
The feather condition of the bird
— the poorer the feather condition,
the greater the cooling effect.
The air speed — the higher the
air speed, the greater the cooling
effect.
The air temperature (dry bulb
temperature) — the higher the
temperature, the lower the
cooling effect.
RH — the higher the RH, the lower
the cooling effect.

Figure 6.21
Theoretical cooling effect felt by a 3.5 kg (7.7 lb) broiler at an air
temperature of 29.4°C (85°F).
°C
9

°F
16

8

14

The actual temperature the birds
feel during tunnel ventilation is
known as the effective temperature.
A thermometer or temperature probe/
sensor cannot measure effective
temperature. Besides the actual
temperature, air speed, bird age,
feather condition, and stocking density
are the major factors that affect
the birds' effective temperature.
As such, during tunnel ventilation, the
readings taken by the thermometer or
temperature probe are of limited use in
determining the actual temperature felt
by the birds (Figure 6.21). It is critical
to observe bird behavior.

6

12

5

10

4

8

3

6

2

4

1

2

0

0

Wind Chill

Stocking density — the higher
the stocking density, the lower
the cooling effect.

0
0

100
(0.5)

200
(1.0)

300
(1.5)

400
(2.0)

500
(2.5)

600 fpm
(3.0) m/s

Air Speed

If the air speed is 2.5 m/s (500 ft/min), the bird would feel approximately
29.4 - 5.6 = 23.8 (oC) (85 - 10 = 75 [oF]). However, the temperature sensor
would still show a temperature of 29.4oC (85oF).

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

81

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Bird Behavior in Tunnel Ventilation
Monitoring and evaluating bird behavior are the only
real ways to determine if tunnel ventilation settings are
correct for the flock's age, stocking density, biomass,
and feather cover.
Use extreme caution when using tunnel ventilation with
younger birds, as the wind-chill effect will be much higher.
If birds sit down and huddle, they may feel cold.
If birds are spread out but with wings held slightly away
from their bodies, or if they are lying on one side with one
wing open, leg outstretched, they may be too warm.
If more than 10% of birds are panting slightly or heavily,
the flock may be too warm. These signs may indicate
a change to ventilation settings is necessary.

When observing bird behavior and making decisions
about the ventilation settings, be sure to observe
the birds from one end of the house to the other,
as conditions may vary throughout the house.
Tunnel ventilation settings should be checked and
adjusted if birds exhibit any of the above mentioned
behaviors. Depending on the behavior of the birds, this
can be achieved by:
Reducing or increasing the number of fans in use.
Turning evaporative cooling systems on or off
(fogging or pads).
Increasing air speed by the use of in-house baffles
to increase the wind-chill effect.
Increasing or reducing the amount of time that
evaporative cooling pad pumps are running.

KEY POINTS
Tunnel ventilation cools birds by creating air flow, and,
therefore, wind chill.
Tunnel ventilation controls the effective temperature
felt by the bird which can only be estimated by bird
behavior.
Younger or poorly-feathered birds feel a greater wind
chill than older or fully feathered birds for a given air
speed, and thus are prone to wind-chill effects.
Monitoring bird behavior is critical.

Tunnel Ventilation Operation
At the stage when tunnel ventilation begins, the sidewall
fans should turn off (if they were used during transitional
ventilation), and the sidewall inlets must close. The tunnel
inlets open, and all air entering the house must enter
through them. The number of fans that run during tunnel
ventilation determines the speed of the air that flows
through the house and the cooling effect on the birds.
Decisions on how many fans should be operating must
be based on bird behavior.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Poster: Transitional Ventilation For Broilers

Appendix 7 provides a fully worked-out example design
calculation for determining the number of fans required
for tunnel ventilation.
During tunnel ventilation, measuring and monitoring air
speed will allow the effectiveness of the ventilation system
to be established and any problems to be identified.
Air speed measurements should be taken at three or four
locations across the width of the house approximately
30 m (100 ft) away from the tunnel ventilation fans. Record
these readings for future reference. The average air speed
should then be compared to the theoretical calculated
air speed or previously measured values. If the actual air
speed is lower than calculated or previously measured,
then appropriate investigations and corrective action should
be taken, such as checking the conditions of the fans and
cooling pads, and the opening of tunnel inlet. Once any
changes to ventilation have been made, it is important to
check bird behavior after 15–20 minutes to ensure they are
comfortable. If bird behavior indicates the ventilation is still
not desirable, then further ventilation changes will need to
be made.

82

Poster: Tunnel Ventilation For Broilers

Tech Note: Broiler Management in
Hot Weather

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

In tunnel ventilation, the thermometer/sensor temperature
should always be a few degrees higher than the required
house set-point temperature to ensure birds do not
become chilled as a result of cold air blowing over them.
How much higher will depend on the air temperature,
RH, the number of fans running, and the age of the birds.

Figure 6.22
Maximum cooling possible during evaporative
cooling is about 70–85% of the difference
between dry and wet bulb temperature.

While it is not uncommon to see approximately 10%
of the birds panting slightly when tunnel ventilation is
working correctly, if the birds still appear to be too hot
when all the tunnel fans are operating, then it will be
necessary to cool the air. This can be done either with
cooling pads, or the use of a fogging system.

Evaporative Cooling Systems
Evaporative cooling is the cooling of air through the
evaporation of water. It can improve environmental
conditions in hot weather and enhance tunnel ventilation.
As a guideline, evaporative cooling should only be
used when the birds’ behavior indicates that the
wind-chill effect on its own is no longer keeping the
birds comfortable. Ideally, evaporative cooling is used to
hold the house temperature at the level where the birds
were last comfortable with all the tunnel fans operating.
The purpose of evaporative cooling is not to reduce the
house temperature back down to (or even close to)
the set-point temperature of the house.

DRY

WET

Maximum cooling possible
(difference between dry
and wet bulb temperature)

The amount of evaporative cooling that can take place
depends on the RH of the ambient external environment.
The lower the RH, the greater the amount of moisture
the air can accept, and thus, a greater amount of
evaporative cooling can occur.
The higher the RH, the lower the air's evaporative
cooling potential.

Consider a wet and dry bulb thermometer (Figure 6.22).
The dry bulb shows the actual air temperature. The
temperature shown by the wet bulb is the lowest
temperature that can be achieved using evaporative
cooling, assuming that the cooling system is 100%
efficient. In general, cooling pads are only ±70–85%
efficient.
There are two main types of evaporative cooling:
pad cooling and spray cooling (fogging/misting).

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

83

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Pad Cooling
In pad cooling systems, tunnel ventilation fans draw
air in through a wet cooling pad (Figure 6.23 and
Figure 6.24). This design and layout of the cooling pads
allow the large volumes of air used in tunnel ventilation
to enter through the pad surface area and be cooled
before entering the house.

Figure 6.23
Example of a cooling pad.

Appendix 7 provides a fully worked-out example
calculation for determining cooling pad area (m2 [ft2]).
Because evaporative cooling adds moisture to the air
and increases RH, it is recommended to turn it off when
the RH in the house exceeds 70%.
Operating Cooling Pads
The use of cooling pads must be managed correctly to
ensure birds do not become chilled. The degree of cooling
that can be achieved with pad cooling will depend upon
the ambient RH in the environment.
Water pumps distribute water onto the cooling pads
during evaporative cooling. When the pumps start
operating, care must be taken to control the amount of
water added to the cooling pads. Too much water on the
pads initially may cause the house temperature to reduce
rapidly. This temperature reduction, in turn, will cause fans
to turn off (if automated), changing the wind-chill effect on
the birds and the environmental conditions from one end
of the house to the other. Ultimately, this change affects
bird comfort and health.

Figure 6.24
Pad cooling with tunnel ventilation.

Air flow

Allowing the cooling pump to turn on and off based only
on the house temperature can result in large fluctuations
in the house temperature. This is because when cooling
starts, the pump will run until the house temperature
decreases to the “off” temperature. By this time, the cooling
pads will already be wet, and although the pump has turned
“off,” the already wet pads will continue to provide cooling
to the incoming air.

Water

Operating the cooling pumps in this way can cause
house temperature to fluctuate by 4–6°C (7.2–10.8°F)
and sometimes more.
OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Evaporative
Cooling Pad
Cooled Air
Entering House

Hot Air

Broiler How To 9: Clean Evaporative
Cooling Pads and Systems
Water for
Recirculation

84

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Better temperature can be achieved by cycling the cooling
pump “on” and “off,” which will initially limit the amount of
water going onto the pads and allow better temperature
control. If the house temperature continues to increase,
then the controller should be capable of automatically
adjusting the pump's “on” period to put more water onto
the pad, thus trying to maintain the required temperature
rather than create a large reduction in the house
temperature. In general, these adjustments cannot
be managed manually.
Water quality can significantly affect cool pad functionality.
Hard water containing high concentrations of Ca can
reduce the cool pad's operating life.
Fogging/Misting
Fogging systems cool incoming air by evaporating water
created by pumping water through spray/fogger nozzles
(Figure 6.25). To maximize the speed of evaporation,
fogging lines must be placed near the air inlets, and
additional lines should be added throughout the house.
There are three types of fogging systems:
Low pressure, 7–14 bar; droplet size up to 30 microns.
High pressure, 28–41 bar; droplet size 10–15 microns.
Ultra high-pressure (misting), 48–69 bar; droplet size
5 microns.

A low-pressure system provides the least amount of
cooling, and due to the larger droplet size, there is
a greater chance of the droplets not evaporating and
causing wet litter. These systems are not recommended
for use in areas of high RH.

The ultra-high-pressure system will create the most
cooling and has the lowest litter-wetting risk.
The number of nozzles and the total amount of water
introduced should be based on the maximum tunnel
fan capacity.
Maximizing Tunnel Ventilation Air Speed
Maintenance is a critical part of maximizing air speed
through the house. It is important to ensure that the
fans are operating at their best. Check the fan belts and
pulleys and ensure that the fan blade/impeller turns at the
recommended revolutions per minute (RPM). Ensure that
the fan shutters open freely to the maximum opening and
that any wire grids on the fans are free of dirt and dust.
Shade cloth or any other material used on the outside of
the fan may create back pressure on the fan that will
decrease its performance.
If there are partition fences within the house, try to use
material with the largest hole sizes possible to assist with
air flow throughout the house. A material with smaller
hole sizes can be used down at floor level while the
chicks are small.
Cooling pads should be clean and unblocked to allow
air flow into the house. Check the distribution system
to ensure good, even water distribution over the entire
cooling pad.
In curtain-sided houses, ensure the curtain closes fully
and seals well along the top and bottom edges. Similarly,
in houses with sidewall inlets, ensure that the inlets are
fully closed during tunnel ventilation.
Air deflectors/baffles installed against the ceiling will help
to increase air speed through the house.

Figure 6.25
Example fogging system for a cross-ventilated house.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

85

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Bird Heat Loss
Birds can lose heat through two methods: sensible heat
loss (SHL) and latent heat loss (LHL).The first method
is SHL (Figure 6.26, green line). When the house
temperature is at or near the recommended set-point
temperature, birds appear comfortable. This is because
the difference between the bird's body temperature and
the air temperature is large enough that the bird is capable
of losing heat from its warm body to the cooler air around
it. When the air temperature is cool, most of the heat loss
comes from SHL. The bird will not be panting at this time.
As the house temperature increases, the difference
in temperature between the bird's body and the air
decreases, so the bird's ability to lose heat through SHL
decreases. As the air gets warmer and the difference
becomes smaller, each cubic meter (ft3) of air can remove
less heat from the bird. Therefore, the need to increase the
air speed to increase air flow through the house and over
the birds becomes larger.
Eventually, if the air temperature continues to increase,
the bird will not be able to lose enough heat through SHL.
This is when birds start to pant. When birds start to pant,
they use their own internal evaporative cooling system by
evaporating moisture from the respiratory system as they
breathe (pant) to help lose heat. This method is known as
LHL (Figure 6.26, blue line).

As the air in the house gets hotter, panting will become
faster. This indicates that the heat loss to the air (SHL)
is decreasing, and the heat loss by internal evaporative
cooling (LHL) is increasing. By 27°C (80.6°F), LHL
becomes the dominant method of heat loss for the bird.
Because LHL involves the evaporation of moisture from
the bird's respiratory system, it is important to try to
minimize the RH in the house as much as possible in the
given ambient climate.
When the outside conditions are hot and humid, the two
main methods of minimizing RH inside the house are by
creating high air speed over the birds (exchanging the air
in the house as fast as possible) and turning off the
cooling pad system. The higher the outside RH, the lower
the cooling potential. Running the cooling pad increases
RH further, which can limit the bird's ability to lose heat.
For example, if the outside RH is above 80% when the
cooling pad is running, the air leaving the cooling pad will
probably be less than 2ºC (3.6°F) cooler. However, the RH
will be in the mid-to-upper range of 90–100%, making
it extremely difficult for the birds to release heat. High air
speed and a short air exchange time are critical in hot and
humid climates.
An evaporative cooling system should always operate
based on a combination of temperature and RH and never
based purely on temperature and/or time of day.

Figure 6.26
Sensible and latent heat loss.

Sensible

Heat loss

Latent

24
(75.2)

Total

27
(80.6)

30
(86.0)

32
(89.6)

Average House Temperature °C (°F)

86

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Combining evaporative cooling with high air speed over
the birds increases the amount of heat that the bird is
able to lose to the environment around it and reduces
its need to lose heat through panting.
Past recommendations have suggested avoiding the
use of evaporative cooling when the house RH was
higher than 70–75% to enable the bird to lose more heat
through panting. Recent research has suggested that the
bird can tolerate a higher RH, provided there is sufficient
air speed to help it lose heat from its body to the air
around it. Also, the higher air speed (fast air exchange
rate) means that RH created by panting is rapidly
removed from the house.
In hot, humid climates, when the natural RH approaches
100% in the afternoon/evening, both high air speed
through the house and a fast air exchange rate are
crucial in keeping birds comfortable. In these conditions,
it is vital that the house has been correctly designed
(i.e., the correct number of fans, and the correct size
of tunnel inlet openings and cooling pad).
When air temperature decreases at night, it does not
necessarily mean the birds will start feeling cooler. As
air temperature decreases at night, the RH increases,
making it more difficult for the panting bird to lose
body heat. Remember that hot, panting birds sitting
down on the litter are trapping heat between their body
and the litter, regardless of the air speed above them.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Having someone walk very slowly through the house to
encourage them to stand up will assist them in losing
some of this trapped heat. The birds must release the
excess heat by the morning or begin the next hot day
with accumulated heat from the previous day.
KEY POINTS
Evaporative cooling is used to enhance tunnel
ventilation in hot weather.
High air speed is much more important than
evaporative cooling.
There are two types of systems: pad cooling and
fogging/misting.
Keep fans, foggers, evaporators, and inlets clean.
Evaporative cooling adds moisture to the air and
increases RH. It is important to operate the system
based on RH and dry bulb temperature to ensure birds
are comfortable.
Monitor bird behavior to ensure bird comfort is
maintained.

87

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Lighting
Objective
To achieve optimal broiler productivity and welfare
through appropriate lighting and its management (hours
of light and dark, light intensity, and distribution).

Wavelengths vary in their ability to penetrate the
brain; for example, long wavelengths (e.g., red light,
>620 nm) appear to penetrate cranial tissue more than
short wavelengths (e.g., blue light, <495 nm). These
differences may result in changes to the physiological
or behavioral responses of the bird.
Color Vision

Principles
Broilers benefit from having a defined pattern of light and
dark (day and night), creating distinct routine periods
for rest and activity. Many important physiological
and behavioral processes follow normal diurnal (daily)
rhythms. Therefore, defined cycles of light and dark
allow broilers to experience natural growth patterns,
development, and behavior.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Aviagen Booklet: Lighting for Broilers

Vision Difference in Poultry
Light Penetration
In poultry, light can reach the photo-receptors in two
ways: through the retina and via direct penetration of
the skull to the photo-receptors located in the brain's
hypothalamus.

Color vision is defined by the number of different types
of cone cells in the retina. The more types of cone cells,
the more colors can be perceived. Humans have 3 types
of cone cells and can distinguish between 3 colors: red,
green, and blue. The retina of poultry contains 4 types of
cones, an additional type of cone cell for the perception
of ultraviolet (UV, <400 nm) light, which is invisible to the
human eye (Figure 6.27). To account for this, gallilux/
clux (what poultry see) should be measured instead of,
or in addition to, lux (what humans see). The effects
of light color (wavelength combination) and intensity
on broilers are mainly behavioral, which can improve
productivity indirectly.
Flicker
Compared to humans, birds have a high flicker fusion
rate (the frequency at which flicker can no longer be
perceived), creating the ability to see fast-moving
objects. This aspect of a bird's vision is important when
considering lighting because birds can detect flicker
(a visible change in brightness) when humans do not.
Flicker leads to stress, which will eventually lead to
decreasing animal welfare and performance. Flicker
has been found to reduce essential behaviors such as
eating, drinking, preening, and bill wiping in starlings.

Figure 6.27
UV vision in birds.

What humans see

88

What birds see

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Considerations for Lighting Management
Lighting components
The four essential components of a lighting program are:
Photoperiod length — the number of hours of light
and dark given in a 24-hour period.
Photoperiod distribution — how the hours of light
and dark are distributed throughout a 24-hour period.
Color Temperature — the warmth or coolness
of a light source depending on the composition
of wavelengths.
Light Intensity — how bright the light provided is.

The interactive effects of these factors need to be taken
into account when lighting broilers. For example, some
production and/or welfare parameters (growth, FCR,
and livability) may change as the photoperiod distribution
changes during a 24-hour period. Also, as light intensity
changes, so does the wavelength composition.
Light Duration and Pattern
Aviagen does not recommend continuous or nearcontinuous lighting (the provision of a short dark period
of up to one hour) for the entire life of the broiler flock.
The assumption that the provision of continuous lighting
results in higher feed consumption and faster growth is
incorrect. Not only does the provision of such a lighting
program for the life of the flock result in depressed
market weights, but it also has negative impacts
on broiler health and welfare.
A number of factors influence the degree to which
a lighting program will affect broiler production:
The broiler flock age at program implementation
— early implementation is the most effective in
benefiting bird health.
Age at processing — older birds are likely to benefit
more from darkness exposure.
Feeder and drinker management — dawn-to-dusk
settings will mean the flock will slowly wake up and
access the feeders and drinkers. When dark periods
are prolonged, birds will be more eager to access
both feeders and drinkers when lights are turned on,
which can result in increased levels of scratches and,
therefore, bird rejections at processing.
Broiler growth rate — the impact of lighting will be
greater in rapidly growing birds.

When considering a lighting program for broilers,
the following points are important:
Day 0–7: 23 hours light and 1 hour dark for the first
days after placement, gradually reaching 4–6 hours of
darkness by 7 days. This will ensure chicks have a good
early feed intake and drinking activity, optimizing early
growth, health, and welfare.
After 7 days: around 5 hours may be optimum
(4–6 hours). It is recommended that a minimum of
4 hours of darkness should be provided from 7 days
of age (this should be introduced gradually).
Establish a consistent lighting schedule for each
flock, ensuring the lights are turned on at the
same time each day.
Consider the seasonal effects on the light schedule
for different flocks. Failure to do this will result in:
 Abnormal feeding and drinking behaviors due
to sleep deprivation.
 Suboptimal biological performance.
 Reduced bird welfare.
Lighting programs for broilers are subject to local laws
and regulations, and the actual duration of dark periods
given must comply.
Just before processing, giving an increased amount of
light hours (e.g., increasing to 23 hours of light 3 days
before depletion) can help with feed withdrawal (by
stabilizing feed intake patterns) and catching (by helping
keep birds calm), but can negatively impact FCR and may
not be in line with laws and regulations in some areas.
KEY POINTS
Keep it simple.
Continuous or near continuous lighting is not optimal.
Exposure to dark periods increases late growth of the
birds, improves feed efficiency, improves livability,
and is necessary for normal behavior.
Many aspects of flock management interact with the
lighting program and modify the effects of lighting
pattern on bird performance.
The lighting program provided must comply with local
laws and regulations, and will depend on individual
flock circumstances and market requirements, but the
following recommendations will benefit bird welfare
and biological performance.
• Day 0–7: chicks should have 23 hours light and
1 hour dark from the first day, and gradually
reduced to 4–6 hours of darkness by 7 days.
• After 7 days: dark period of 4–6 hours.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

89

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Gradual vs. Abrupt Changes in Light
Abrupt changes (reductions in hours of light) create
immediate drops in feed intake, body-weight gains, and
feed efficiency. Although over time broilers will adapt their
behavior (change their pattern of feed intake) in response
to such a change, gradually changing the lighting
program (both day length and light intensity) is preferable.
This is particularly important if birds are to be processed
at younger ages. Under these circumstances, birds will
have less time to adapt to their feeding and drinking
behavior, so the effects on live performance will be
more pronounced.
In addition to making gradual changes to the lighting
program itself, making a gradual change (over 2–3 days)
to the introduction of dark or light periods may also
be beneficial. Feeding activity in broilers is greatest
immediately after the lights go on and for a period
(of approximately 1 hour) before the lights go off.
Using dawn-to-dusk programs (initiating dark or light
periods over a period of 15–45 minutes) will result in
birds gradually moving toward the feeder and can
help alleviate crowding of all birds at once.
KEY POINTS
Changes to a lighting program should be gradual over
a period of 2–3 days, rather than one abrupt change.
A dawn-to-dusk program in addition to the lighting
program will result in gradual movement of birds
toward the feeders and less crowding at the feeders
and drinkers.

Intermittent Lighting Programs
Intermittent lighting programs consist of blocks of
time containing both light and dark periods, which
are repeated throughout the day. Splitting the dark
period into two or more sections may have impacts
on some productivity parameters in broilers:

Body weight at market age and breast meat percentage
may be higher.
The extra activity caused by a regular light and dark
pattern may benefit leg health and carcass quality.

If intermittent lighting programs are used, they should
be designed as simply as possible to allow for practical
implementation. At least one of the dark periods should
contain a continuous block of at least 4 hours of
darkness. Any intermittent lighting program must
adhere to local laws and regulations.
If an intermittent lighting program is used, adequate
feeding and drinking space must be provided. It may also
be necessary to stagger the light (awake) periods from
house to house across the farm to ensure that the water
supply is not pushed beyond its maximal limits.
KEY POINTS
Intermittent lighting programs should be designed
to be simple.
Intermittent lighting programs must adhere to local
laws and regulations.
Intermittent lighting programs should allow for
one continuous period of at least 4 hours of darkness.
Provision of adequate feeding and drinking space
is key if using an intermittent lighting program.
Stagger intermittent lighting programs to ensure
water availability.

Color Temperature
Color temperature is the temperature required to heat
a blackbody (something black) to get a specific color.
The color temperature of visible light is measured in degrees
Kelvin (K) on a scale from 1,000–10,000 (Figure 6.28).

Figure 6.28
The Kelvin scale for measuring color temperature.

90

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

At the lower end of the scale, <3,000 K, the light produced is considered “warm white,” where red is the dominant
wavelength. Above 4,000 K, the light produced is considered cool, and the dominant wavelength is blue.
Knowing the K value of the lights will provide information about the dominant wavelength within that light. This allows
the right temperature of the light bulb to be chosen for the specific circumstances of the flock (e.g., market weight).
For broiler flocks targeting <2 kg (4.4 lb), the color temperature should be 5,000–6,000 K, whereas broilers
>2 kg (4.4 lb) should target a color temperature of 3,500–4,500 K.
Wavelength (Light Color)
There is no strong scientific evidence to show that one particular light bulb color performs better in broilers when
comparing white light, which contains all colors of the human visible light spectrum (380–700 nm) (Figure 6.29).
Birds have a much wider spectral range from 330–740 nm.
With the increased uptake of LED lights in the field and, therefore, the ability to alter the light color, there has
been increased research into the exact requirements of light color for broiler flocks. Light color is dictated by the
composition of wavelengths, which can impact broiler behavior and the resulting productivity and welfare outcomes.
The requirements and effects of different wavelengths on broiler behavior differ from breeding stock flocks. Red
wavelengths have been found to increase aggression through increased testosterone production. In contrast, the
provision of light with a higher proportion of blue/green wavelengths (450–560 nm) has been shown to promote
calmness, which can improve FCR, livability, and leg health and reduce processing rejects.
At the hatchery and during catching, the provision of these blue/green wavelengths has been generally accepted to
calm birds and complete these processes in a calm, efficient, and welfare-friendly manner.
When comparing various wavelengths of monochromatic light at the same light intensity, broiler growth rate appears
to be better in broilers exposed to wavelengths of 415–560 nm (violet to green) than in those exposed to >620 nm
(red) or broad spectrum (white) light.
Figure 6.29
The light spectrum.
10-12 meters
Cosmic rays

10-9
1 nanometer
Gamma rays

X-rays

10-6
1000 nanometer
Ultraviolet (UV)

Infrared (IR)

Microwaves

10-3
1 millimeter

101
1 meter

103
1 kilometer

Radar

Radio

Broadcast Band

Short Wavelengths
Ultraviolet (UV)

Long Wavelengths
Infrared (IR)

Visible Light

400 nanometers

500 nanometers

600 nanometers

700 nanometers

KEY POINTS
Poultry vision differs from humans in how they receive light, color spectrum, and sensitivity to flicker.
The K value indicates the light's dominant wavelength, helping select the right bulb for flock needs. Broilers <2 kg
(4.4 lb) need 5,000–6,000 K, while >2 kg (4.4 lb) need 3,500–4,500 K.
The provision of cooler light toward the blue/green end of the spectrum can promote calmness.
Violet to green light may be beneficial to broiler growth.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

91

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Provision of Light — Lamp types
There is no consistent data to show that one type of lamp induces better performance than any other, so lamp choice
will depend on availability, capital outlay, running costs, and the ability to dim using conventional voltage-reduction
equipment. The advantages and disadvantages of various lamp types are given in Table 6.3 below.
Table 6.3
Advantages and disadvantages of different lamp types.
Lamp Type
Incandescent

Advantages

Disadvantages

Wavelength Spectrum

Good spectral range.

Inefficient.

Warm light.

Can be used with
dimmer.

Lasts 700–1,000 hr
and need to replaced
frequently.

Mixture of wavelengths.

Inexpensive.

≈15 lumen/watt
(tungsten).
≈25 lumen/watt
(halogen).
High energy cost.

Fluorescent/
Compact Fluorescent

More efficient than
incandescent.

Difficult to dispose of
(contain mercury).

Uses less power.

Cannot be used with
dimmer.

Lasts longer.
Reduces electricity
cost compared to
incandescent.

Available in both cool and
warm spectra (K).
Emits very specific
wavelengths and these
are combined to provide
the color needed, but
intermediate wavelengths
are missing.

Energy efficient.

High initial cost.

200 lumens/watt.

Cheaper lights will
not have suitable light
spectrum or be suitable
for the environment in the
poultry house.

Provides a full
spectrum of light.

Lasts up to 50,000 hr.
Specific lighting colors
can be chosen.
Some can be used
with a dimmer.

Halogen

Issues with flicker.

400–700 nm — similar
color spectrum to
incandescent lights.

Does not reach maximum
intensity immediately
when turned on.

Relatively inexpensive
but more expensive than
incandescent.

LED

Loses intensity over time.

White light.

Luminous efficiency.
Stable color temperature.
Almost no light decay.
More efficient than
incandescent.

Flicker can be a problem
if not installed correctly.
Not ideally suited to
dusty environments.
Less efficient than LED
and fluorescent lamps.
More expensive than
incandescent lamps.

The actual light color
spectrum can be
changed depending
on the chemicals used
in the light.

Produces continuous
spectrum of light (like
incandescent lamps) but
the spectrum is shifted
toward blue.

Emits a lot of heat.

Sodium Vapor

Energy efficient.

Sodium is hazardous.

Long life span.

Warm up time is required
(5–15 mins).

Consistent color
temperature (warm).

92

Requires a ballast.

Warm light with highest
intensity in yellow, red,
and orange.
Color temperature
is ≈2,100 K.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Currently, there is little evidence that light source affects
the biological performance of broilers. However, there
are several points that should be considered:
Flicker: Broilers detect light bulb flicker at frequencies
below ≈180 hertz (Hz). High-frequency (>200 Hz) light
bulbs should be used where available and should be
replaced as required. This will, among other things,
reduce/avoid flickering of light, which is negative for
bird welfare and can affect bird behavior.
Compatibility: It should also be noted that the lighting
system should be fully compatible, and therefore,
the dimmer, bulb, and control panel work seamlessly
together.
Poultry-specific light: Do not purchase and use
domestic LED bulbs in poultry houses; they are of lower
quality and are not designed to cope with the conditions
within a poultry house. In addition, the spectrum of light
they emit may not be broad enough for broilers.

Measuring Light
Because chickens perceive light differently, it is reasonable
to measure light intensity differently. Depending on the light
source and color spectrum, birds may perceive light intensity
as up to 50% or higher than that measured by a light meter
(using lux). Therefore, it is valid to use an approach that
corrects this. Specific gallilux (the spectrum and intensity
of light the bird actually sees, also known as clux) meters
are available, but light meters sold for agricultural purposes
will have conversion tables for converting lux to gallilux in
the instruction booklets. Determining what light intensity is
actually perceived by the birds will allow a more accurate
selection of suitable light and more precise management
of light intensity. The light meter needs to be appropriate
for the light type. For example, not all agricultural light
meters are necessarily accurate for LED lights.
Measure light intensity at the bird level across a number
of points within the bird area.

Figure 6.30
Example of 10 lux/1 fc (top) and 30 lux/3 fc (bottom) light intensity.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

93

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Light Intensity

Hot Weather Management

Local laws and regulations for light intensity must be
followed*, but a minimum light intensity of 30–40 lux
(2.8–3.7 fc) in whole house brooding or 80–100 lux
for spot brooding from 0–7 days of age and 5–10 lux
(0.5–0.9 fc) thereafter will improve feeding activity and
growth. Figure 6.30 illustrates two examples of light
intensity. Chick activity should be monitored to determine
if the light intensity is appropriate for their age.

In hot weather conditions and where environmental
control capability is limited (such as in open-sided
housing), the period without artificial light should be
timed to maximize bird comfort. For example, feed can
be removed for a time during the heat of the day, and
a light period provided during cooler external conditions
to allow birds to feed during this cooler period.

*For example, European law requires a minimum of 20 lux
on at least 80% of the house surface and at least a total of
6 hours of darkness starting from 8 days of age (Directive
2007/43/EC).

A low daytime light intensity (<5 lux/0.5 fc) may negatively
impact mortality, FCR, and growth. Low light intensities
may also:
Affect eye growth.
Lead to increased footpad lesions.
Reduce activity and comfort behaviors (dust bathing,
scratching, etc.).
Impact on physiological rhythms as birds may not be
able to detect the difference between day and night.

The light intensity should be less than 0.4 lux (0.04 fc) to
attain a state of darkness. During the dark periods, care
should be taken to avoid light leakage through air inlets,
fan housings, and door frames. Regular tests should be
conducted to check the effectiveness of light-proofing.
One way to do this is to stand in the center of the house
and turn the lights off. Any light leakage into the house
will be observed.
Uniformity of Light Intensity

A continuous dark period of at least 4 hours must
be provided during the night.
KEY POINTS
There is little evidence that light source affects bird
performance.
Use a light meter appropriate for the light source to
verify light intensity.
Provide a minimum light intensity of 30–40 lux (3–4 fc)
to 7 days of age. Thereafter, provide an intensity of at
least 5–10 lux (0.5–0.9 fc). Local laws and regulations
must be adhered to at all times.
During the dark period, light intensity must remain
below 0.4 lux (0.04 fc).
Light must be evenly distributed throughout the
poultry house, keeping variation between light and
dark areas to <30%.
In hot weather or in open-sided housing, the period
of artificial light should be given at a time that
maximizes bird comfort.

Light must be uniformly distributed throughout the
house where the difference between the lightest
and darkest areas of the bird area is minimized, and
variation is <30%. Differences in light intensity in the
brood area can lead to localized high stocking density
and, therefore, increased pressure in feeder and
water lines, leading to compromised productivity and
reduced welfare outcomes. Lights should be evenly
distributed throughout the house and be equidistant
from the house floor. Lighting manufacturers can provide
recommendations on the number and position of the
bulbs to minimize light uniformity issues. Lights must be
kept in good working order, and when replacing singular
bulbs, they are replaced with similar replacements.

94

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Litter Management
Geographical region, local economics, and raw material availability will dictate the choice of litter material.
Table 6.4 gives the advantages and disadvantages of different types of litter material.
Table 6.4
Advantages and disadvantages of different types of poultry litter material.
Litter Material

Advantages

Disadvantages

Pine Shavings and
Sawdust

Preferred litter material in many
areas.

Hardwood Shavings
and Sawdust

Better accessibility compared to
softwood shavings.

Often high in moisture.

Pine or
Hardwood Chips

Used successfully in many areas.

May cause an increase in breast blisters if allowed to become too wet.

Pine or
Hardwood Bark

Similar to chips and shavings in
moisture-holding capacity.

Medium-sized particles are preferred.

Rice Hulls

Inexpensive litter material where
available.

Peanut Hulls

Inexpensive litter material available
in peanut-producing areas.

Coconut Husks

Sand

Inexpensive litter material available
in coconut-producing areas.
Can be used in arid areas on
concrete floors.

Crushed Corn Cobs

Readily available and high
absorbency.

Chopped Straw or Hay

Best used 50/50 with wood
shavings.

Straw Pellets

Increased water-holding capacity
compared to sawdust.

Increasingly expensive and limited in supply.

Can become susceptible to dangerous mold growth if stored improperly.

Young chicks may be prone to litter eating.
Poor moisture-holding capacity.
Does have a tendency to cake and crust, but this is easily managed.
Susceptible to mold growth and increased incidence of aspergillosis.
Some problems with pesticides have been noted.
Does have a tendency to cake and crust, but this is easily managed.
Needs good management. If too deep, bird movement may be impeded.
More difficult to maintain the floor temperature during cold-weather brooding.
Ample time and ventilation are needed prior to brooding to ensure dryness.
May cause an increased incidence of breast blisters.
High incidence of caking.
Mold growth is also a possibility.
Slow to break down.
Might be expensive.

Cakes less easily than sawdust.
Processed Paper

Top dressing paper base with
shavings may be helpful to
decrease caking.

Chemically-Treated
Straw Pellets

Has good absorption capacity and
the absence of sharp edges.

Peat Moss

Preferred material for dustbathing.

Flax Straw
Recycled Litter

Low incidence of caking.
Not dusty. Good absorption.
Can be used after proper
treatment.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Can be difficult to manage in humid conditions.
Tendency to cake with increased particle size.
Must use as recommended by the supplier.
Might be expensive.
Limited availability.
Limited availability.
Increased incidence of bacterial contamination.

95

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

No matter what type of litter material is used in the broiler
house, good litter should provide the following:
Good moisture absorption.
Biodegradability.
Bird comfort.
Low dust level.
Freedom from contaminants.
Consistent availability from a biosecure source.

Concrete floors are washable and allow for more effective
biosecurity and litter management. Earth floors are not
recommended.
Poor litter quality will cause increased incidence of FPD
and hock burn. Since the primary cause of FPD is wet
and caked litter, it is important to maintain the proper
ventilation for moisture control in the house. Footpad
dermatitis may cause increased carcass downgrading
and should be monitored to determine if additional litter
needs to be added. Figure 6.31 gives some of the main
causes of poor litter quality.

Figure 6.31
Causes of poor litter quality.

Litter Material
Poor quality litter material.

Insufficient litter depth.

Drinker Management
Water pressure too high.
Incorrect drinker height.

Environmental
Management

Stocking Density

Poor management of the
ventilation system.

High overall
stocking density.
Localized high
stocking density due
to drafts, light, etc.

Insufficient preheating of the
house prior to placement.

Nutrition
High salt diets.
High protein diets.

Health
Enteritis due to disease.

Poor-quality fats used.

96

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Nutritional Strategies to Manage
Litter Quality
Provided suitable management, health, and environmental
practices are followed, the following nutritional strategies will
help to ensure good litter quality is maintained:
Protein Quality
Avoid excess levels of crude protein by supplying the correct
amount of BP from good-quality raw materials. This will
prevent high water intake, support gut health and reduce
the risk of wet litter.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Aviagen Brief: Practical Considerations
for Reducing the Risk of Pododermatitis

Tech Note: Broiler Foot Health –
Controlling Footpad Dermatitis

Minerals
Supply the correct balance of dietary Na, K, and Cl levels
to avoid increased water intake which can be a primary
cause of wet litter

Aviagen Booklet: Management Tools to
Reduce Footpad Dermatitis in Broilers

Anticoccidial Program
Generally, anticoccidials benefit gut health. These products
typically improve gut integrity and help maintain litter
condition. Using a live vaccination for coccidiosis control
in broilers, however, requires greater care and attention
to gut health to ensure good litter condition.
All Plant Protein Based-Broiler Nutrition Specifications
Aviagen developed a separate set of Ross Broiler
Nutrition Specifications – All Plant Protein-Based
Feeds for those areas or concepts where animal protein
is prohibited and/or FPD has an economical value. These
recommendations feature shorter feeding phases resulting
in smaller dietary transitions between diets to promote
enteric health. Additionally, BP recommendations are slightly
lower to optimize enteric health, good litter quality while still
achieving excellent broiler performance.
KEY POINTS

Ross Broiler Nutrition Specifications –
All Plant Protein-Based Feeds

Reuse of Litter
Although the reuse of litter from flock-to-flock is poor
practice, it is understood that this may be unavoidable in
regions where the supply and cost of providing new litter
and disposal of used litter for each flock is prohibitive.
If the reuse of litter is unavoidable, the process must
be well managed if loss of flock performance is to be
minimized. One of the most common methods of treating
used litter is composting it and creating “windrows” inside
the house (scraping the litter into a long row in the middle
of the house; heat buildup helps reduce pathogen load
before the litter is reused). Using this technique properly
is not easy and should be cautiously approached.

Use broiler feeds with the correct level of BP.
Avoid excessive Na, Cl, and K, which will increase bird
water intake and contribute to wet litter conditions.
Provide an effective anticoccidial program that improves
gut health and maintains good litter quality.
Consider all plant protein-based nutrition specifications
to optimize enteric health, litter quality, and performance
with shorter feeding phases and slightly lower BP levels.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

97

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Methodologies should be in place to measure moisture
levels and sample for contamination from pathogens
and other harmful materials. Figure 6.32 is an example
of how to assess litter moisture levels quantitatively using
a grain moisture meter.

Figure 6.33
Platform perch provision encourages perching
behavior.

Things to consider when composting litter include
the following:
Litter quantity determination.
Carbon determination.
Nitrogen determination.
Carbon to nitrogen ratio.
Moisture determination.

If de-caking litter, it is important to remove all of the top
caked layer for proper NH3 control.
Figure 6.32
Litter moisture measurement.

KEY POINTS
Provide a dry, warm covering to the floor by using
adequate quantities of good-quality litter material.
Sufficiently preheat the floor temperature to 28–30°C
(82.4–86.0°F) before placement.
Avoid nutritional causes of wet litter.
Ensure adequate ventilation and avoid excess
moisture.
Choose absorbent, non-dusty, biosecure, and clean
litter material that is readily available from a reliable
source.
Use fresh litter or properly treated reused litter for each
flock to prevent reinfection by pathogens.

Perch Provisions for Broilers
Perching on an elevated surface is an essential behavior
in most avian species; roosting kept birds out of reach
of predators before domestication. This behavior is still
observed in commercial broilers. Although providing
perches is not a common practice, many researchers
have investigated the optimal perch provision and design
to promote bird use, which is adequate for their age and
physiological development. It has been identified that the
provision of perches to broilers allows birds to select an
area with lower temperatures away from the warmer litter
material, which may improve performance and welfare by
relieving heat stress and leg issues. The provision of platform
perches (Figure 6.33) encourages perching behavior in
broilers; this is a result of better support for the body of the
broiler and the reduced need to balance compared to the
bar perch design. Continuous movement through activity
on and off a perch positively impacts tibia weights in broilers
and increases muscle mass around the leg bone.

98

Litter storage facilities should be protected from the
weather and secure from access by vermin and wild
birds.
Perches allow broilers to find cooler areas, reducing
heat stress and leg issues, improving performance
and welfare.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Aviagen Brief: Reused Litter Treatments
for Improved Bird Health

Aviagen Booklet: Leg Health:
A Compendium of Influencing Factors

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Stocking Density

It is important to make sure that local laws and
regulations for stocking density are adhered to.

Stocking density is ultimately a decision based on
economics and local welfare laws and regulations.
Stocking density influences bird management, which
in turn may influence bird welfare, broiler performance,
uniformity, and product quality per bird.

Welfare standards may include adequate provision of
feed and water, sustainable and optimal indoor climatic
conditions, and minimal incidence of FPD.

Overstocking increases the environmental pressures on
the broiler, compromises bird welfare and end product
quality, and will reduce profitability per bird.

In hot conditions, the stocking density used will depend
on ambient temperature and humidity. Make appropriate
changes according to house type and equipment
capabilities.

The quality of housing and the environmental control
system determine the best stocking density. If stocking
density is increased, ventilation, feeding space, and
drinker availability must be adjusted.
The floor area needed for each broiler will depend on:
Target live weight and age at processing.
Climate and season.
Type and system of housing and equipment,
particularly ventilation.
Local laws and regulations.
Quality assurance certification requirements.

Appendix 8 provides an example calculation for stocking
density. In certain regions of the world, stocking density
regulation is based simply on kg/m2 (lb/ft2). An example
of this is the European Union (EU).
Stocking densities are based on the EU Broiler
Welfare Directive (2007):
33 kg/m2 (6.7 lb/ft2), or
39 kg/m (8.0 lb/ft ) if stricter standards are met, or
2

2

42 kg/m2 (8.6 lb/ft2) if exceptionally high welfare
standards are met over a prolonged period of time.

Various audit programs take into account bird number
and bird mass in the floor area. An example of this is the
recommendations from the National Chicken Council
(2010) used in the USA:
Below 4.5 lb (2.04 kg), maximum stocking density
is 6.5 lb/ft2 (32 kg/m2).
4.5–5.5 lb (2.04–2.49 kg), maximum stocking density
is 7.5 lb/ft2 (37 kg/m2).

Stocking Density in Hot Climates

Listed below are examples of stocking densities used
in hot conditions.
In houses with controlled environment:
A maximum of 30 kg/m2 (6.1 lb/ft2) at processing.

In open-sided houses, with poor environmental control:
A maximum of 20–25 kg/m2 (4.1–5.1 lb/ft2) at processing.
At the hottest times of the year, a maximum of
16–18 kg/m2 (3.3–3.7 lb/ft2).

In open-sided houses, with no environmental control:
It is not recommended that birds grow to live weights
above 3 kg (6.6 lb).

KEY POINTS
Adjust stocking density to allow for the age and weight
at which the flock will be processed.
Match stocking density to the climate and housing system.
Reduce stocking density if target house temperatures
cannot be achieved due to hot climate or season.
Adjust ventilation as well as feeding and drinking space
if stocking density is increased.
Follow local laws and regulations and requirements of
quality assurance standards set by product purchasers.

Above 5.5 lb (2.49 kg), maximum stocking density
is 8.5 lb/ft2 (42 kg/m2).

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

99

SECTION 6

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

CONTENTS

Notes

100

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Section 7: Health and Biosecurity
Objective
To maintain hygienic conditions in the poultry house, minimize disease risks, ensure optimal performance
and bird welfare, and uphold food safety standards.

Principles
Implementing correct biosecurity, cleaning and disinfection, vaccination programs, and good management
practices within the poultry house promotes hygienic conditions (Figure 7.1).
Figure 7.1
Biosecurity in a broiler farm.

INTERIOR

SHED-TO-SHED ACCESS
Litter/bedding storage
in an adapted biosecure
area to maintain the
pathogen-free status

KEEP A RECORD

VEHICLES

ANIMAL & PEST CONTROL

EQUIPMENT

VISITORS

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Best Practice in the Broiler House:
Biosecurity

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Poster: Poultry Farm Biosecurity

101

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Bird Health and Biosecurity

Poor bird health will negatively impact all aspects of flock
management and production, including growth rate, FCR,
condemnations, livability, and processing traits.
The flock must start with good-quality, healthy day-old
chicks, sourced from a minimal number of breeder flocks
with similar health status—ideally, one donor flock per
house.
On-farm disease control programs involve:
Disease prevention (biosecurity and vaccination
programs).
Early detection of health issues (monitor health status
and production parameters).
Treatment of identified disease conditions.

Biosecurity and vaccination are integral to successful
health management. Biosecurity prevents disease
introduction, and appropriate vaccination programs
address endemic diseases.
Regular monitoring of production parameters is vital
for early disease detection and targeted intervention.
Early identification and intervention in one flock will help
prevent disease from spreading to surrounding and
successive flocks.
Production parameters should be reviewed closely and
compared with company/published targets, such as:
The number of birds dead on arrival (DOA).
7-day body weight.
Daily and weekly mortality.
Daily water consumption.
Average daily gain.
FCR.
Processing condemnations.

When monitored production parameters fail to meet
established goals, trained personnel should thoroughly
investigate the causes.

Hygiene Management

Strict operation of a comprehensive program of hygiene
management is essential if proper attention is to be given to:

An agreed biosecurity program should be in place for each
flock. Regular education and staff training are essential.
When developing a biosecurity program, three levels of
biosecurity should be considered:
Conceptual — Farm Location
Ideally, the farm should be located in an isolated area,
at least 3.2 km (2.0 mi) from the nearest poultry or
other livestock facilities to minimize contamination.
Farm planning information is available in Section 6:
Environmental Requirements.
Facilities should be built away from rivers and ponds
to prevent exposure to wild birds.
The farm should be located away from major roadways
that may be used to transport poultry.
Fence the perimeter of the farm to prevent unauthorized
access.
Test the water source for mineral, bacterial, and
chemical contamination regularly, as the water quality
can vary due to seasonal changes, weather, and
agricultural activities.

Structural — House Design
Housing should be designed to minimize traffic flow,
facilitate cleaning and disinfection, and prevent entry
by wild birds and rodents.
Ideally, the poultry house should have concrete floors,
washable (i.e., impervious/waterproof) walls and
ceilings, accessible ventilation ducts, and no internal
pillars or ledges. Earth floors are challenging to clean
and disinfect adequately.
Broiler houses should face East-West to minimize solar
heat gain through the sidewalls.
Clear a 15 m (49.2 ft) area around each house for
easy grass maintenance. Gravel or pebbles are
low-maintenance, but a concrete apron is preferred
for durability. (Figure 7.2).
Figure 7.2
Example of good farm planning.

Site biosecurity.
Site cleaning.

Biosecurity

Biosecurity is the planning and implementation of
management practices to protect bird health against the
introduction and spread of disease-causing agents into
the broiler flock.

102

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Figure 7.3
Elements of disease exposure.
Housing
Feed

People
Other Poultry,
Livestock, and Pets

Chicks

Equipment
and Vehicles

Insects

Hatchery

Litter
Rodents

Water

Wild Birds

Operational — Prevention of Diseases Transmitted by Humans and Animals
Procedures must control the movement of people, feed, equipment, and
animals on the farm to prevent the introduction and spread of disease. Routine
procedures may have to be modified in the event of a change in disease status.
Figure 7.3 presents many of the potential routes of disease exposure.
Preventing Diseases Transmitted by Humans

Figure 7.4
Boot sanitizing procedures
before entry into a house.
The best practice is to change
boots completely upon entry
to the house (bottom picture).

Lock the entry gates and post no trespassing/no visitors signage to minimize
the number of visitors and prevent unauthorized access to the farm.
All people entering the farm should follow a biosecurity procedure, including
showering and a complete change of clothing and footwear.
Maintain a record of visitors, including name, company, purpose of visit,
previous farm(s) visited, and next farm to be visited. Depending on the
status of the flocks visited, it may be necessary to have a minimum of
72 hours of downtime (no contact with poultry).
Workers and visitors must wash and sanitize their hands and boots when
entering and leaving each poultry house. The best practice is to change
boots between houses, with a barrier separating dirty (outside) and clean
(bird) areas (Figure 7.4). Foot dips can be used as an alternative to changing
boots, but these are not as effective as changing boots completely. In some
instances, body sprays for disinfection are also used.
Tools and equipment carried into the house are a potential source of
disease. Only necessary items should be taken into the house and only after
they have been properly cleaned and disinfected.
If supervisory personnel cannot avoid visiting more than one farm per
day, they should visit the youngest flocks first. If an infectious disease is
suspected, all visits should be stopped immediately.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

103

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Preventing Diseases Transmitted by Animals
Whenever possible, place the farm on an “all-in/all-out”
placement cycle.
Downtime between flocks will reduce farm contamination.
Downtime is the time between depleting one flock
and placing the next flock. Decisions on the length of
downtime are economic, but the longer the downtime
between flocks, the lower the risk of disease transmission
between flocks. A good rule for broilers is to leave
10–14 days of downtime before placing the next flock.
Keep all vegetation cut 15 m (49.2 ft) away from the
buildings to provide an entry barrier to rodents and wild
animals.

Maintain an effective rodent/vermin control program.
This should include mechanical, biological, and
chemical controls. Baiting programs are most effective
when followed continuously. Figure 7.5 illustrates an
effective rodent control program. The actual number
of baiting points placed must be appropriate to the
risk. Stations should be spaced 15–23 m (50–75 ft)
apart, with a maximum distance between stations of
30 m (100 ft). A full explanation of the diagram can be
accessed from Best Practice on the farm: Rodent
control.

A biosecurity program should be:

Do not leave equipment, building materials, or litter
lying around. This will reduce cover for rodents and
wild animals.

Mandatory.

Clean up feed spills as soon as they occur.
Ensure feed bins are fully closed after deliveries.

Cost effective.

Store litter material in bags or inside a storage
building or bin.

Committed to by the whole company and staff.

Keep wild birds out of all buildings by ensuring they
are adequately sealed against wild bird access.
Any holes or gaps should be covered.
Where appropriate, additional anti-rodent barriers, such
as an electric rodent fence or metal/concrete fence,
should be established around the farm or house.

Practical.
Part of staff training programs.
Financially resourced.
Reviewed regularly and the result quantified.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Best Practice on the Farm:
Rodent Control

Figure 7.5
Example of a rodent baiting plan.
Runs

DITCH

Rodent
Nest Holes

GARAGE

BARN

Temporary
Bait Point
Permanent
Bait Point

POULTRY HOUSE

POULTRY HOUSE

HOUSE

104

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Cleaning and Disinfection
Properly cleaning and disinfecting the poultry house, service
areas, and surroundings removes potential pathogens
and minimizes residual bacteria, viruses, parasites, and
insects between flocks. This will minimize any effect on the
subsequent flock's health, welfare, and performance.
Planning: A successful cleanout requires that all
operations are effectively carried out on time. Cleanout is
an opportunity to carry out routine maintenance on the
farm and this should be planned into the cleaning and
disinfection program. A plan detailing dates, times, labor,
and equipment requirements should be drawn up before
depleting the farm. This will ensure that all tasks can be
completed successfully. A standard operating procedure
(SOP) for house cleaning and disinfection should be
available at all farm sites.
Insect Control: Insects are disease vectors and must
be destroyed before they migrate into woodwork or other
materials. The litter, equipment, and all surfaces should
be sprayed with a locally-approved insecticide as soon
as the flock has been removed from the house and while
it is still warm.
Remove Dust: All dust, debris, and cobwebs must be
removed from fan shafts, beams, and exposed areas
of unrolled curtains in open-sided houses, ledges, and
stonework. Use a brush (or blower) for best results so
the dust falls onto the litter.
Pre-spray: Use a backpack or low-pressure sprayer to
apply a detergent solution throughout the inside of the
house (from ceiling to floor) to dampen dust before litter
and equipment are removed. In open-sided houses, the
curtains should be closed first.
Remove Equipment: All equipment and fittings
(drinkers, feeders, fences, etc.) should be removed from
the building and placed on the external concrete area.
Automatic feeders and drinkers should be raised during
house cleaning. Any house or equipment maintenance
should be completed before cleaning and disinfection.
Remove Litter: All litter and debris must be removed
from the house. Trailers or rubbish bins (dumpsters)
should be placed in or near the house and filled with
soiled litter. The full trailer or dumpster should be covered
before removal to prevent dust and debris from blowing
around outside. Vehicle wheels must be brushed and
spray-disinfected on leaving the house. When litter is
reused, please refer to Litter Management in Section 6.

Litter Disposal: Litter must not be stored on the farm
for fertilizer or spread on land adjacent to the farm.
It must be removed to a distance of at least 3.2 km
(2.0 mi) from the farm and disposed of per local laws
and regulations in one of the following ways:
Spread on arable land and plowed within 1 week.
Buried in an approved landfill site, quarry, or hole in the
ground (in some areas, this is not allowed).
Stacked and allowed to heat (i.e., compost) for at least
1 month before spreading on livestock grazing land.
Incinerated (refer to local laws and regulations).
Burned as a biofuel for electricity production.

Washing: Before washing starts, check that all electricity
in the house has been switched off to avoid the risk of
electrical shock. A main switch with a lockout function
and a suitable padlock should be used. A pressure
washer with foam detergent should be used to remove
the remaining dirt and debris from the house and
equipment. Many different industrial detergents are
available, and manufacturer instructions should always
be followed. The detergent must be compatible with the
disinfectant used to disinfect the house later on.
After washing with detergent, the house and equipment
should again be rinsed with clean, fresh water using a
pressure washer. Hot water (54.4–60.0oC [130–140oF])
should be used for cleaning, and excess floor water
should be removed using “squeegees” (a rubber-edged
blade set on a handle). Wastewater should be disposed
of hygienically to avoid recontaminating the house.
All equipment removed from the house must also be
soaked, washed, and rinsed. Cleaned equipment should
then be stored under cover.
Inside the house, particular attention should be paid to
the following areas:
Fan boxes.
Fan shafts.
Fans.
Ventilation grills.
Tops of beams.
Ledges.
Water systems.
Feed systems.
Air inlets
Augers.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

105

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

It is recommended that portable scaffolding and portable
lights be used to ensure that inaccessible areas are
properly washed.
The outside of the building must also be washed,
with special attention given to:
Air inlets.
Fan exhausts.
Gutters.
Concrete pathways (especially at the points of bird
entry into and exiting the house).
Silos/feed bins.
Scales – auto-weighers and manual scales.

In open-sided housing, the inside and outside of curtains
must be washed. Any items that cannot be washed
(e.g., polythene and cardboard) must be destroyed
and replaced where appropriate.
When washing is complete, no dirt, dust, debris, or litter
should be present. Proper cleaning requires time and
attention to detail. Staff facilities and equipment should
also be thoroughly cleaned at this stage.
Cleaning Water and Feed Systems
All equipment within the house must be thoroughly
cleaned and disinfected. After cleaning, the equipment
must be stored under cover to prevent recontamination.
The water system cleaning procedure:

Biofilms will form inside water pipes; regular treatment to
remove them is needed to prevent decreased water flow and
bacterial contamination of drinking water. Using a cleaner
before the sanitizer is highly recommended before each flock.
Pipe material type will influence the rate of biofilm formation.
For example, biofilm forms faster on alkathene (plastic) pipes
and tanks. Using vitamin and mineral treatments in drinking
water can increase biofilm and aggregation of materials in
the pipes. Physical cleaning of the inside of pipes to remove
biofilms is not always possible; therefore, between flocks,
biofilms can be removed by using a peroxygen compound.
These need to be flushed completely from the drinking
system before birds drink. Cleaning may need to include
mineral and limescale remover where the water mineral
content (especially Ca or Fe) is high. Metal pipes can be
cleaned the same way, but corrosion can cause leaks.
Treatment of the birds’ drinking water before use should be
considered for water with a high mineral content.
Evaporative cooling and fogging systems can be sanitized
using a biguanide sanitizer at cleanout. Biguanides can
also be used during the flock cycle to ensure that the
water used in these systems contains minimal bacteria,
reducing bacterial spread into the poultry house.
The procedure for cleaning the feed system is as follows:
Run auger systems out and ensure no feed is left.
Empty, wash, and disinfect all feeding equipment
(e.g., feed bins, track, chain, pans, and hanging feeders).
Empty bulk bins and connecting pipes and brush out
where possible. Clean out and seal all openings.

Drain pipes and header tanks.

Ensure feed lines and equipment are allowed to dry
properly if wet-washed.

Clean the regulator.

Fumigate wherever possible.

Flush lines with clean water.
Scrub header tanks to remove scale and biofilm
deposits and drain to the house's exterior.
Refill the header tank with fresh water and add an
approved water sanitizer.
Run the sanitizer solution through the drinker lines
from the header tank, ensuring no airlocks. Ensure the
sanitizer is approved for use with the drinker equipment
and used at the correct dilution.
Fill header tank to normal operating level with additional
sanitizer solution at appropriate strength.
Replace lid. Allow the disinfectant to remain for
a minimum of 4 hours.
Drain and rinse with fresh water.
Refill with fresh water before chick arrival.
Water samples should be analyzed for the TVC.

Repairs and Maintenance
A clean, empty house provides the ideal opportunity
for repairs and maintenance to be completed. Once the
house is empty, pay attention to the following tasks:
Repair cracks in the floor with concrete/cement
or approved epoxy resin.
Repair pointing (mortar joints) and cement rendering
on wall structures.
Repair or replace damaged walls, curtains, and
roof/ceilings.
Carry out painting or whitewashing where required.
Ensure that all doors close completely and seal tightly.
Check the efficiency of fans, ventilation and heating
systems, extraction and inlet openings, and all other
environmental control equipment.
Fan belt-tightening and fan backdraft shutter maintenance.

106

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

It is best practice for each farm to have its own toolbox
with the tools needed to do necessary maintenance.
This limits the tools that might need to be brought
onto the farm by external contractors.
Disinfection
Disinfection should not occur until the whole farm
(including the internal and external areas) is thoroughly
cleaned, all repairs are complete, and the house and
equipment are dry. Disinfectants are ineffective in
the presence of dirt and organic matter, and efficacy
will decrease when surfaces are wet because of the
disinfectant's increased dilution.
Disinfectants approved by regulatory agencies for use
against specific poultry pathogens of both bacterial
and viral origin are the most likely to be effective.
Manufacturer’s instructions must be followed at all times.
Disinfectants should be applied using either a pressure
washer or a backpack sprayer. Foam disinfectants
allow greater contact time, increasing the efficacy of
disinfection. Heating houses to high temperatures after
sealing can enhance disinfection.
Most disinfectants are ineffective against sporulated
coccidial oocysts. However, where there is a need to
treat the environment to try to remove a background
challenge of oocysts, other treatments can be used,
though these are not always effective. For concrete
floors, using flaming, salt, or specific disinfectants based
on phenolic compounds can be beneficial. Salt (NaCl)
can also be used on earth floors. Ammonia is very
effective against coccidial oocysts, but in most parts
of the world, the use of NH3 is prohibited because of
concerns about personnel health and safety.
Formalin Fumigation
Where formalin fumigation is permitted, fumigation
should be undertaken as soon as possible after
disinfection has been completed. Surfaces should be
damp (this can be done through the use of foggers to
increase the RH of the house) and the houses warmed to
a minimum of 21oC (69.8oF). Fumigation is ineffective at
lower temperatures and at RH levels of less than 65%.
Doors, fans, ventilation grills, and windows must be
sealed. Manufacturers’ instructions concerning the use
of fumigants must be followed. After fumigation, the
house must remain sealed for 24 hours with NO ENTRY
signs clearly displayed. The house must be thoroughly
ventilated before entry, and formalin levels should be
verified beforehand.
After the litter material has been spread, all the
fumigation procedures described above should be
repeated. Fumigation is hazardous to animals and
humans, and is not permitted in all countries.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Where permitted, fumigation must be conducted by
trained personnel following local safety laws and regulations.
Personnel, welfare, and health and safety guidelines
must always be followed. Additionally, protective clothing
(i.e., respirators, eye shields, and gloves) must be worn.
At least two people must be present in case of emergency.
Floor Treatment
In some situations, floor treatments may also be
necessary. Table 7.1 lists some common floor
treatments, their doses, and uses.
Table 7.1
Common floor treatments for poultry houses.

Compound

Application Rate

Purpose

kg/m2

lbs/100 ft2

Boric acid

0.05–0.1
or as
necessary

1–2 or as
necessary

Kills
darkling
beetles

Salt (NaCl)

0.25

5

Reduces
clostridium
counts

Sulphur
powder

0.1

2

Lowers pH

Lime (calcium
oxide/hydroxide)

0.6 or as
necessary

12 or as
necessary

Disinfection

Cleaning External Areas
External areas must also be cleaned thoroughly. Ideally,
poultry houses should be surrounded by an area of
concrete or gravel, 1–3 m (3.3–9.8 ft) in width. Where this
does not exist, the area around the house must:
Be free of vegetation.
Be free of unused machinery and equipment.
Have an even, level surface.
Be well-drained and free of any standing water.

Particular attention should be paid to cleaning and
disinfection of the following areas:
Under ventilation and extractor fans.
Under the feed bins.
Storage rooms.
Access routes.
Door surrounds.

All external concrete areas should be washed and
disinfected as thoroughly as the inside of the building.

107

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Evaluation of Farm Cleaning and Disinfection
Efficacy
It is essential to monitor the efficacy of cleaning and
disinfection. The effectiveness of cleaning is commonly
evaluated by completing Salmonella isolations. TVC may
also be useful. Bacterial counts and Salmonella isolations
should be completed at least once per flock. Monitoring
trends in Salmonella and/or TVCs will allow continuous
improvement in farm hygiene and comparisons of
different cleaning and disinfection methods.
Bioluminescence technology identifies and measures
adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a molecule present in all
plants, animals, and microorganisms. The presence of
ATP on cleaned surfaces helps assess the effectiveness
of the cleaning process.
When disinfection has been carried out effectively, the
sampling procedure should not isolate any Salmonella
species. Please consult a veterinarian for a detailed
description of where to sample and recommendations
on how many samples to take.
KEY POINTS
A clear program of hygiene management should
be in place for site biosecurity, site cleaning and
disinfection.
Adequate biosecurity should prevent disease from
entering the farm via both humans and animals.
Site cleaning must cover both the interior and exterior
of the house, all equipment and external house areas,
as well as the feeding and drinking systems.

Where bacterial counts in water are high, the cause should
be established and rectified immediately. Chlorination to
give between 3–5 ppm of free chlorine at the drinker level
is usually effective in controlling bacteria and viruses, but
this is dependent on the type of chlorine component used.
When treating water with chlorine, water pH should be
kept between 6.5-8.5. If the water pH is above this, the
effectiveness of the chlorine will be decreased.
Measuring the oxidative reduction potential (ORP) of
water is a good way to determine if the water sanitation
program is working (Figure 7.6). The oxidation value
of a water sanitizer reflects its activity rather than its
concentration level (ppm).
Chemicals like chlorine, bromide, hydrogen peroxide,
peroxyacetic acid, and ozone are all oxidizers; therefore,
ORP readings are important in determining their
effectiveness. An ORP meter indicates the cleanliness
of the water and its ability to break down contaminants.
The more contaminants in the water, the lower the
amount of O2 and the lower the ORP reading. An ideal
ORP reading should be between 650 and 800 mV. An
ORP reading of over 650 mV indicates that a water
sanitation program using chlorine will effectively control
most potential challenges that are waterborne or spread
to the birds via the water supply. If the ORP is below 650
mV, pH, chlorine concentration, water purity, and waterline
cleanliness must be checked. ORP meters are relatively
inexpensive, and if used, the manufacturer’s calibration,
testing, and cleaning instructions should be followed.
Figure 7.6
An example of an ORP meter.

Reduce pathogen carryover by allowing adequate
downtime between flocks for cleaning.
Appropriate planning and evaluation of the cleaning
and disinfection procedures must be in place.

Water Quality
Water should be clear with no organic or suspended
matter. It should be monitored to ensure purity and
freedom from pathogens. Specifically, water should be
free from Pseudomonas species and Escherichia coli.
There should be no coliforms in any one sample.
Table 7.2 provides water quality criteria for poultry.
Water from a municipal supply usually has fewer water
quality issues. However, water from wells or boreholes
may have excessive nitrate levels and high bacterial
counts due to runoff from fertilized fields.

108

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Table 7.2
Water quality criteria for poultry.
Criteria

Concentration
(ppm)

Comments

Total Dissolved
Solids (TDS)

<1,000

Good.

1,000–3,000

Satisfactory: Wet droppings may result at the upper limit.

3,000–5,000

Poor: Wet droppings, reduced water intake, poor growth, and increased mortality.

>5,000

Unsatisfactory.

<100 Soft

Good: No problems.

>100 Hard

Satisfactory: No problem for poultry, but can interfere with effectiveness of soap and
many disinfectants and medications administered via water.

<6

Poor: Performance problem, corrosion of water system.

6.0–6.4

Poor: Potential problems.

6.5–8.5

Satisfactory: Recommended for poultry.

>8.6

Unsatisfactory.

<200

Satisfactory: May have a laxative effect if sodium (Na) or magnesium (Mg) is >50 ppm.

200–250

Maximum desirable level.

250–500

May have a laxative effect.

500–1,000

Poor: Laxative effect (birds may adjust), can interfere with copper absorption; additive
laxative effect when combined with chlorides.

>1,000

Unsatisfactory: Increased water intake and wet droppings, health hazard for the young birds.

<250

Satisfactory: Maximum desirable level, levels as low as 14 ppm may cause problems if
sodium is >50 ppm.

250–500

Acceptable with caution.

>500

Unsatisfactory: Laxative effect, wet droppings, reduced feed intake, increases water intake.

<300

Good: No problems.

>300

Satisfactory: Depends on the alkalinity and pH.

50–125

Satisfactory: If sulfate level is >50 ppm magnesium sulfate (laxative) will form.

>125

Laxative effect with intestinal irritation.

300

Maximum desirable level.

Nitrate Nitrogen

10

Maximum (sometimes levels of 3 mg/L will affect performance).

Nitrates

Trace

Satisfactory.

>Trace

Unsatisfactory: Health hazard (indicates organic material fecal contamination).

<0.3

Satisfactory.

>0.3

Unsatisfactory: Growth of iron bacteria (clogs water system and bad odor).

2

Maximum desirable level.

>40

Unsatisfactory: Causes soft bones.

Bacterial
Coliforms

0 colony forming
unit (CFU)/mL

Ideal: Levels above indicate fecal contamination.

Calcium

60

Average level.

Sodium

50–300

Satisfactory: Generally no problem, may cause loose droppings if sulfates are >50 ppm
or if chloride is >14 ppm.

Hardness

pH

Sulfates

Chloride

Potassium
Magnesium

Iron
Fluoride

*If there are issues with intestinal health, a more acidic water pH of 5–6 will be beneficial.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

109

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Ultraviolet light (applied at the point of drinking water entry to the house) can also be used to disinfect water.
Manufacturers’ guidelines should be followed when establishing this procedure.
Hard water or water with high iron levels (>3 mg/L) can cause blockages in drinker valves and pipes and support
bacterial growth. Sediment will also block pipes; where this is a problem, water should be filtered using a 40–50
micron (µm) filter.
A total water quality test should be done at least once a year and more often if there are perceived water quality issues
or performance problems. After house cleaning and before chick delivery, water should be sampled for bacterial
contamination at the source, the storage tank, and the drinker points.
It is a good idea to routinely check the farm's water supply quality during a flock. This can be done by running water
out of the end of each water line and checking for clarity. If water lines and sanitation are not adequate, a high level
of particulate matter will be visible to the naked eye. If this occurs, take action to rectify the issue. However, the
absence of visible particles does not guarantee the water is clean. Regular testing and maintenance are key to
ensuring water quality.
KEY POINT

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Good water quality is essential for bird health and welfare.
Aviagen Brief: Water Quality

Water quality should be routinely tested for bacterial
and mineral contamination and corrective action taken
as necessary based on the test result.

Dead Bird Disposal
Appropriate methods of dead bird disposal should follow local laws and regulations. Their advantages and
disadvantages are given in Table 7.3.
Table 7.3
Methods for dead bird disposal.
Method

Advantages

Disadvantages

Disposal Pits

Inexpensive to dig and tend to produce a low odor.

Can be a reservoir for diseases and requires
adequate drainage.
Groundwater contamination is a concern.

Incineration

Does not contaminate groundwater or produce
cross-contamination with other birds when facilities
are properly maintained.
Little by-product to remove from the farm.

Tends to be more expensive and may produce air
pollution.
Environmental and regulatory sensitivities.
Must ensure sufficient capacity for future farm needs.
Must ensure that carcasses are burned completely
to white ash.

Composting

Economical and if designed and managed properly,
will not contaminate groundwater or air.

If not done to the correct temperature, live viable
diseases may be present on the farm.

Rendering

There is no on-farm disposal of dead birds.

Requires freezers to keep birds from decomposing
during storage.

Requires minimal capital investment.
Produces minimal environmental contamination.
Materials can be turned into feed ingredients for
other appropriate livestock.

110

Requires intense biosecurity measures to ensure
that personnel do not transfer diseases from the
rendering plant to the farm.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

KEY POINT
Dead birds should be disposed of in a manner that
avoids contamination of the environment, prevents
cross-contamination with other poultry or other
animals, is not a nuisance to neighbors, and is in
accordance with local laws and regulations.

Disease Control
Good management practices and high standards of
biosecurity will prevent many poultry diseases. One of the
first signs of a disease challenge is the alteration of water
or feed intake. Therefore, keeping daily feed and water
consumption records is a good management practice.
If a problem is suspected, immediately send birds
for post-mortem examination and contact the flock
veterinary adviser. Appropriate early treatment of a disease
incident may minimize the adverse effects on the birds’
health and welfare. Records are an essential means of
providing objective data for investigating flock problems.
Vaccinations, route of application, batch numbers,
medications, observations, and disease investigation
results should all be recorded in flock diaries.

Vaccination
Vaccination exposes the bird to a particular form of an
infectious organism (antigen) to promote an immunological
response. When administered correctly, vaccines are
helpful to protect the bird from subsequent field challenges.
An appropriate vaccination program should be developed
in consultation with a veterinarian, considering the local
disease challenges. Sick or stressed birds should not be
vaccinated.
Vaccination Programs
Common diseases, including Marek’s disease (MD),
Newcastle disease (ND), infectious bronchitis (IB),
and infectious bursal disease (IBD or Gumboro disease),
among others, should be routinely considered when
a vaccination program is prepared for broilers. However,
vaccination requirements will vary depending on local
challenges, vaccine availability, and local laws and
regulations. Local flock veterinary advisers should design
a suitable program using their detailed knowledge of the
disease prevalence and pressure in a specific country,
area, or site.
Dyes, vaccine titers, vaccine takes, and the absence
of clinical signs of disease can be used to assess
the effectiveness of vaccines and vaccine delivery.
It should be noted that titers are not always correlated
with protection, but they are still useful when evaluating
vaccination programs.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Excessive vaccination may lead to poor titers and/or
CVs of titers. Overly aggressive vaccination programs
can also impact growing chickens, so minimize bird
handling where possible. The field situation should also
be considered when evaluating the effectiveness of
a vaccination program. Hygiene and maintenance of
vaccination equipment are essential, and following the
vaccine manufacturer’s instructions on administration
methods is vital to achieve optimum results.
Vaccination can help prevent disease but is not a direct
replacement for good biosecurity. Protection against each
disease should be assessed when devising a suitable
control strategy. The vaccines used in the vaccination
program should be limited only to those necessary. This
will reduce costs, have less impact on the birds, and
provide a greater opportunity to maximize the overall
vaccine response. Vaccines should be obtained from
reputable manufacturers only. Always use the full dosage
and do not dilute vaccine doses. Properly discard vaccine
bottles and vials after use. In broilers, always consider
the levels of maternal antibodies and their interaction with
vaccines administered on the day of hatch or during the
first weeks of life.
Types of Vaccine
Broiler vaccines include live (attenuated and nonattenuated), killed (inactivated), and recombinant types.
Some vaccination programs may be combined to
promote maximum immunological response. Each type
of vaccine has specific uses and advantages.
Live Vaccines
These consist of infectious organisms of the actual
poultry disease. Most of the time, the organisms have
been substantially attenuated or modified.
Live attenuated or modified live vaccines:
These are usually administered to the flock via drinking
water, spray, or eye drop application. The organisms
used in this type of vaccine are attenuated to reduce the
risk of causing adverse reactions. Live vaccinations can
be given by injection (e.g., MD and IBD).
In principle, when several live vaccinations are given for a
specific disease, the most attenuated form of the vaccine is
usually given first, followed by a less-attenuated form where
available. This principle is commonly utilized for ND live
vaccination when a pathogenic field challenge is anticipated.
Modified live bacterial vaccines for Salmonella are now
available and may have a place in some production
systems. Some competitive exclusion products—
consisting of healthy bacteria normally found in the
gastrointestinal tract, which help to minimize colonization
of undesirable harmful bacteria such as Salmonella—can
also have a place in protecting broilers from Salmonella
and possibly other infections early in life or after antibiotic
treatment.

111

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Non-attenuated vaccines: Some vaccines are
exceptional because they are not attenuated and require
more care before introducing into a vaccination program
(e.g., some wild-type coccidiosis vaccines).

Specific Vaccination Programs

Killed or Inactivated Vaccines

A suitable vaccination program for broilers should be
established by the local veterinarian responsible for the health
status of the operation, following local laws and regulations.

These may contain multiple inactivated antigens to
several poultry diseases. Killed vaccines are administered
to individual birds by injection (e.g., subcutaneously).
Recombinant Vaccines
These commonly use a live attenuated virus as a vector
to carry the gene or genes encoding the desired vaccine
antigens. For example, the recombinant vaccines
based on the herpesvirus of turkeys (HVT) can carry
the infectious laryngotracheitis (ILT) or IBD antigen.
The advantage of this type of vaccine is that the vaccine
does not carry the ILT or IBD virus but can still produce
a protective immune response. Recombinant vaccines
can be bivalent (e.g., HVT-IBD or HVT-ILT) or trivalent
(e.g., HVT-IBD-ILT or HVT-IBD-ND).

Vaccination programs must be designed according to
the age of the bird being grown, local disease challenges,
and maternal antibody titers (refer to the broiler breeder
vaccination program record for details).

Aviagen veterinarians are available to provide suggestions
or supportive information. Table 7.4 provides some
essential factors for the successful vaccination of broilers.
Marek’s Disease Virus (MDV)
There are three different serotypes of live MDV vaccines
available. In broilers, the most commonly used serotype
is serotype 3, typically in the form of HVT. Although HVT
is not widely used worldwide, its importance is increasing
because MDV can cause severe immunosuppression,
making broilers more susceptible to other diseases.
Additionally, MDV is widely used as a vector for various
recombinant vaccines.

Table 7.4
Factors for a successful vaccination program.
Vaccination Program(s) Design

Vaccine Administration

Vaccine Effectiveness

Programs must be based on veterinary
advice tailored to specific local and
regional challenges established by health
surveys and laboratory analysis.

Follow manufacturer recommendations
for product handling and method of
administration.

Seek veterinary advice before
vaccinating sick or stressed birds.

Carefully select single or combined
vaccines according to the age and health
status of flocks and the type of vaccine
being used.
Vaccination must result in the
development of consistent levels of
immunity while minimizing potential
adverse effects.
Keep the broiler breeder vaccination
program in mind. Breeder programs
should provide adequate and uniform
maternal antibody levels to protect broiler
chicks against several viral diseases
during the first weeks of life (e.g., IBH,
IBD, and Reovirus).
Maternal antibodies may interfere or
modulate the chick’s response to some
vaccine strains. Maternal antibody levels
in broilers will decline as the breeder
source flock ages.

112

Properly train vaccine administrators to
handle and administer vaccines.
Maintain vaccination records.
When live vaccines are given in sanitized
water, sanitization must be stopped
24–48 hours before vaccine addition, and
a commercial vaccine stabilizer should
be added to the water with the vaccine
(Non-fat powdered or liquid milk could
be used in places where no commercial
product is available).

Periodic and efficient house cleaning
followed by the placement of new litter
material, reduces the concentration of
pathogens in the environment.
Adequate downtime between flocks
helps to reduce the buildup of normal
house pathogens that can affect flock
performance when reusing litter.
Regular audits of vaccine handling,
administration techniques, and postvaccinal responses are critical to control
challenges and improve performance.
Ventilation and management should be
optimized post-vaccination, especially
during times of vaccine-induced reaction.
Evaluation of the vaccine take should
be implemented (e.g., enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay [ELISA] titers or
polymerase chain reaction [PCR]).

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Coccidiosis
Control of coccidiosis is important in broilers. This can be
done by the use of anticoccidial medications or vaccination.
In broilers, coccidiosis is controlled mainly by using
in-feed anticoccidials, which depend on local laws and
regulations. Periodic broiler evaluation via necropsy and
measuring the oocysts per gram (OPG) counts from fecal
sampling can also help monitor the effectiveness of
a coccidiosis control program.
In some markets, vaccinating broilers with live
coccidiosis vaccines at the hatchery is one alternative
method for controlling this condition. Sometimes, birds
are vaccinated on farm. Care should be taken to prevent
subsequent exposure of the flock to substances with
anticoccidial activity (except where recommended by the
vaccine manufacturer). Post-vaccination management
ensuring oocyst sporulation and re-infection is necessary
to improve vaccine efficacy. Birds should be monitored
by routine necropsies at specific ages (depending on the
vaccine) to monitor for excessive reactions. Controlling
vaccine reactions through good management and
application is crucial for good bird performance.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Tech Note: Coccidiosis Control in
Broilers with the use of Vaccines

Aviagen Brief: Drinking Water
Vaccination

Salmonella and Feed Hygiene
Salmonella infection through contaminated feed represents
a significant threat to bird health. The risk of contaminated
feed can be minimized by thermal feed processing and/or
adding feed additives with antimicrobial activity. Monitoring
raw materials will provide information about the degree of
challenge coming from the ingredients in the diets.
Raw materials of animal origin and processed vegetable
proteins are at high risk of Salmonella contamination,
and their source and use in feeds for broilers should be
considered carefully.
In some markets, thermal processing of feed (e.g.,
conditioning, extending, and pelleting) is used
to reduce bacterial contamination. An ideal goal is
<10 Enterobacteriaceae per gram of feed.

Antibiotics
Antibiotics should be administered only for therapeutic
purposes, such as treating infections, preventing pain
and suffering, and preserving flock welfare. Antibiotics
should be used only under the direct supervision of a
veterinarian (following local laws and regulations), and
records of all prescriptions should be kept.
KEY POINTS
Keep records and monitor flock health.
Good management and biosecurity will prevent many
poultry diseases.
Monitor feed and water intake for the first signs
of a disease challenge.
Respond promptly to any signs of a disease challenge
by completing post-mortem examinations and
contacting the local veterinarian.

Aviagen Booklet: Marek's Disease Virus

Tech Note: Bacterin Usage

Aviagen Brief: Best Practice
Management in the Absence of
Antibiotics at the Hatchery

Vaccination alone cannot fully protect flocks if biosecurity
and management are poor. It is most effective when
combined with proper biosecurity, tailored to local disease
challenges, and based on the availability of vaccines.
Coccidiosis control can be managed through in-feed
anticoccidial medications or vaccination.
Salmonella infection via feed is a threat to bird health.
Heat treatment and monitoring raw materials will
minimize the risk of contamination.
Only use antibiotics to treat disease and with
veterinary supervision.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

113

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Disease Investigation
Disease investigation requires knowledge of what to expect at what age and how to detect abnormalities in the flock.
It is also important to be familiar with the normal behavior, performance parameters, or standards for the breed.
Seek veterinary advice immediately when health problems are seen or suspected in broiler flocks. It is helpful to stay
current with local and regional health concerns to be aware of any potential disease challenges.
A systematic approach is required when troubleshooting health issues on the farm. These are the things to look at:
Feed: Availability, consumption, accessibility, distribution, palatability, nutritional content, contaminants, and toxins.
Light: Adequate for efficient growth and development, uniform exposure, and intensity.
Litter: Material used, depth, distribution, moisture level, pathogen load, toxins, and contaminants.
Air: Speed, availability, humidity, temperature, contaminants (NH3, CO2 level, and toxins), and barriers.
Water: Availability, consumption, distribution, source, contaminants and toxins, pathogen load, additives, and sanitizers.
Space: Stocking density, limiting obstacles, limiting equipment, feed, and water availability.
Sanitation: Hygiene of premises, pest control, maintenance, cleaning, and disinfection practices (house and grounds,
feeders, drinkers, and feed bins, etc.).
Biosecurity: Biosecurity risks (house design and biosecurity practices).

114

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Tables 7.5 and 7.6 highlight examples of mortality parameters possibly related to bird quality, health and welfare.
The tables also suggest potential investigative actions using the approach for troubleshooting the health issues
outlined above.
Table 7.5
Troubleshooting common issues in the 0–7 day brooding phase.
Observe

Investigate

Poor Chick Quality:

Flock Status, Egg and Chick
Handling and Transport, Sanitation:

Increased dead on arrivals (DOA).
Chicks are inactive and slow to
respond, lacking energy.
General chick appearance:

Source flock health and hygiene
status.
Egg handling, storage, and transport.

• Unhealed navels.

Hatchery sanitation, incubation, and
management.

• Dark, wrinkled legs.

Chick processing, handling, and
transport.

• Red hocks/beaks.

• Discolored or malodorous yolks
or navels.

Small Chicks on Days 1–4

Feed, Light, Air, Water, and Space:
Crop fill in the first 2–4 hours
post-chick placement.
Availability and accessibility to feed
and water.
Bird comfort and welfare.
Low or poor uniformity of light
intensity.
Brooding setup.

Runted and Stunted Chicks:
Small birds, as early as 4–7 days.

Feed, Light, Litter, Air, Water,
Space, Sanitation, and Biosecurity:
Flock source.
Hydration status of chicks.
Brooding conditions.
Feed quality and accessibility.
Downtime between flocks.
Disease challenge.

Likely Causes
Inadequate diet of source flock.
Health and hygiene status of source
flock, hatchery, and equipment.
Incorrect parameters for egg storage,
RH, temperatures, and equipment
management.
Incorrect moisture loss during
incubation.
Incorrect incubation temperature.
Dehydration caused by excessive
spread of hatch time or late removal
of chicks.
Less than 75–80% of chicks with
adequate crop fill by the first
2–4 hours after placement.
Young donor flocks.
Weak chicks.
Equipment location and maintenance
issues.
Inappropriate brooding temperature
and environment.
Chicks sourced from a wide range
of donor flock ages.
Chicks unable to find or reach water.
Incorrect brooding temperatures.
Chicks unable to find feed or have
poor feed quality.
Short downtimes between flocks
(<10 days).
Inadequate cleaning and disinfection.
Disease.
Poor biosecurity and hygiene
practices.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

115

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Table 7.6
Troubleshooting common issues after 7 days of age.
Observe

Investigate

Disease:

Feed, Light, Litter, Air, Water,
Space, Sanitation, and Biosecurity:

Metabolic.
Bacterial.
Viral.
Fungal.
Protozoal.
Parasitic.
Toxins.

Likely Causes
Poor environmental conditions.
Poor biosecurity.

Broiler farm hygiene.

High disease challenge.

Local disease challenge.

Low disease protection.

Vaccination and disease
prevention strategies.

Inadequate or improper
implementation of disease
prevention.

Feed quality and supply.

Poor feed quality.

Lighting and ventilation.

Poor bird access to feed.
Excessive or insufficient ventilation.

Unusual Bird Behavior

Potential Sources:

Inadequate environmental
management.

Temperature.

Inadequate equipment.

Management of CO2 levels.

Inadequate bird comfort and welfare.

Immunosuppressive disorders.
High Number of Birds
DOA to the Processing Plant:
High plant condemnation rate.

Feed, Light, Litter, Air, Water,
Space, Sanitation, and Biosecurity:
Flock records and data. Health
status of the flock.

Health issues during growing period.
Management of relevant historical
events affecting bird health and
welfare.
Improper bird handling and hauling
by crews.

History of the flock during the
growing period (such as feed,
water, or power outages).
Potential equipment hazards on
the farm.
Bird handling by the catchers,
handlers, and transporters.

Harsh conditions (weather- or
equipment-related) during handling,
catching, or transport to the
processing plant.

Experience and training level of
individuals handling and transporting
birds.
Conditions during catching and
transporting (such as weather and
equipment).
For more problem solving actions, see Appendix 6.

KEY POINTS
Know what to expect and be alert to deviations from the expected.
Observe. Investigate. Identify. Act.
Use a systematic approach. Look for the obvious and cover your bases.

116

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Disease Recognition
Recognizing health problems involves several steps. In diagnosing a disease problem and planning and implementing
a control strategy, it is important to remember that the more thorough the investigation, the more accurate the
diagnosis and the more effective the controlling actions.
Early disease recognition is critical. Changes in feed and particularly water intake can be one of the first indications
of disease, so daily feed and water intake must be monitored. Daily observations of the birds, their behavior, and any
changes in behavior and vocalizations are also key to early disease recognition.
Table 7.7 Below highlights ways to recognize signs of disease.
Table 7.7
Recognizing signs of disease.
Observations by Farm Personnel

Farm and Laboratory Monitoring

Data and Trend Analysis

Daily assessment of bird behavior.

Regular farm visitation.

Daily and weekly mortality.

Bird appearance (such as feathering,
size, uniformity, and coloring).

Routine post-mortem examinations
of normal and sick birds.

Water and feed consumption.

Environmental changes (such as
litter quality, heat or cold stress,
and ventilation issues).

Proper sample collection size
and type.

DOA after placement on the farm or
after arrival at the processing plant.

Clinical signs of illness (such
as respiratory noise or distress,
depression, fecal droppings,
and vocalization).
Flock uniformity.

Proper choice of subsequent
analysis and actions following
post-mortem examination—needs
validation/clarification.

Temperature trends.

Condemnations at processing.

Routine microbiological testing of
farms, feed, litter, birds, and other
appropriate material.
Appropriate diagnostic testing.
Appropriate serology.

KEY POINTS
Observe daily bird behavior, appearance, and environment for illness signs.
Monitor systematically with visits, tests, and diagnostics.
Record accurately health data and trends.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

117

SECTION 7

HEALTH AND BIOSECURITY

CONTENTS

Notes

118

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Appendix 1: Production Records
Keeping accurate production records and completing regular analyses of them is essential for determining the effects
of changes to nutrition, management, environment, and health status, ensuring the effectiveness of broiler stock
management. Collating essential production records (e.g., live weight, FCR, and mortality) in a database allows
analysis and interpretation of both current flock performance and long-term trends, which is essential to improving
future flocks' management and performance.
Hygiene and disease status should also be regularly monitored.
Standard operating procedures are good practice for all processes in a broiler operation. These should include
documentation of established protocols, records, analysis of records, and monitoring systems.
Records Required in Broiler Production
Event

Records

Comment

Number of day-old chicks received.
Flock(s) of origin and flock(s) age.
Chick placement

Date and time of arrival.
Chick quality.

Check chick weight, uniformity, number of dead on arrival.
Check crop fill percentage for time post-placement.

Crop fill.
Record by sex if possible.
Record culls and reason for culling separately.
Mortality

Daily.

Post-mortem records of excessive mortality.

Weekly.

Scoring of coccidial lesions will indicate the level of coccidial
challenge.

Cumulative.

Record actual numbers and percentages.
Particular importance should be given to 7-day mortality.
Administration date.
Amount.
Medication

Batch number.

As per veterinary instruction.

Expiration date.
Withdrawal periods.
Date of vaccination.
Disease vaccinated for.

Vaccination

Vaccine type.

Any unexpected vaccine reaction should be recorded.

Batch number.
Expiration date.

Live weight

Weekly average live weight.
Weekly uniformity (CV%/uniformity%).

More frequent measurement is required when predicting
processing age/weight.

Date of delivery.
Quantity.
Feed

Feed type.
Feed form.
Date of starting feed withdrawal prior
to catching.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Accurate measurement of feed consumed is essential to
measure FCR and to determine the cost-effectiveness of the
broiler operation.
Check physical feed quality.

119

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Records Required in Broiler Production (Continued)
Event

Records
Daily consumption.

Water

Water-to-feed ratio.
Water quality.
Level of chlorination.

Comment
Plot daily consumption in graph form, preferably per house.
Sudden fluctuation in water consumption is an early indicator of
problems.
Mineral and/or bacteriological records (especially areas where
wells/ boreholes are present or open water reservoirs are used).

Floor temperature.
Litter temperature during brooding.
External Temperature.
Daily minimum temperature.
Daily maximum temperature.

Relative Humidity.
Environment

Temperature and RH should be
monitored:
At least twice daily in the first
5 days.
Once daily afterward.

Multiple locations should be monitored, especially in the chick
brooding area.
Automatic systems should be cross-checked manually each
day.
Ideally, record dust, CO2, and NH3 levels.

Air quality.
Litter quality.
Last calibration of equipment
and by who.
Number of birds removed.
Depletion

Time and date of removal.
Time of feed withdrawal.
Number of birds removed due
to being sick or small.
Dead on arrival (DOA).

Information from
processing plant

Carcass quality.
Health inspection.
Carcass composition.
Type and percent of condemnations.

Cleaning Out
House Inspection
Lighting program

Total viable counts (TVC).
Record the times of daily checks.
Make note of any bird observations.
Dark and light period.
Time on and time off.

After disinfection, Salmonella, Staphylococcus, or E. coli may
be monitored if required.
Behavior and environmental conditions.
Intermittent or not.

Who.
Visitors

Date.
The purpose of the visit.

Complete for every visitor to ensure traceability.

Previous farm visits
(place and date).

120

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Appendix 2: Useful Management Information
Drinking Space during Brooding
Recommended drinking space requirements
during brooding.

Flow Rate
Recommended flow rates at a particular age
for broilers.

Drinker Type

Drinking Space

Bird Age (days)

Bell

8 drinkers per 1,000 chicks
(125 chicks per drinker)

Water Intake
ml/min (oz/min)

0–7

20–29 (0.68–0.98)

Nipple

10–12 birds per nipple

8–14

30–39 (1.01–1.32)

Mini-drinker or tray

12 mini-drinkers per
1,000 chicks

15–21

40–49 (1.35–1.66)

22–28

50–69 (1.69–2.33)

>28

70–100 (2.37–3.38)

Drinking Space Post-Brooding
Minimum drinking space requirements
post-brooding.
Drinker Type

Nipple

Bell

Drinking Space
< 3 kg (6.6 lb)
12 birds per nipple
> 3 kg (6.6 lb)
9 birds per nipple
8 drinkers (40 cm/
15.7 inches in diameter)
per 1,000 birds

These rates are only guidelines. Follow the manufacturer’s
guide and closely monitor the uniformity of flow rate, water
consumption, and birds’ behavior.

Feeding Space during Brooding
Feeding space per bird for different feeder types.
Feeder Type

Brooding: 100 chicks per pan
(plus small amount on paper)
Pan

Feed Form
Feed form and recommended particle size by age
in broilers.
Age
(days)

Feed
Form

Particle size

0–10

Crumble

2–3.5 mm (0.08–0.14 in) diameter

11–18

Pellet

3–5 mm (0.12–0.20 in) diameter
5–7 mm (0.20–0.28 in) length

19–finish

Pellet

3–5 mm (0.12–0.20 in) diameter
6–10 mm (0.24–0.39 in) length

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Feeding Space

Post-brooding: 45–80 birds per pan
(the lower ratio for bigger birds
[>3.5 kg/7.7 lb])

Flat Chain/
Auger*

2.5 cm/bird (0.98 in/bird)

Tube

70 birds/tube
(for a 38 cm/15.0 in diameter)

*Birds fed on both sides of the track.

121

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Temperature and RH
Principles of how optimum dry bulb temperatures for broilers may change at varying RH. Dry bulb temperatures
at the ideal RH at a weight less than 200 g (0.44 lb)+ are colored green.
Dry Bulb Temperature °C (°F)

Body Weight
g (lb)

40 RH%

50 RH%

60 RH%

70 RH%

44 (0.10)

36.0 (96.8)

33.2 (91.8)

30.8 (87.4)

29.2 (84.6)

100 (0.22)

33.7 (92.7)

31.2 (88.2)

28.9 (84.0)

27.3 (81.1)

180 (0.40)

32.5 (90.5)

29.9 (85.8)

27.7 (81.9)

26.0 (78.8)

290 (0.64)

31.3 (88.3)

28.6 (83.5)

26.7 (80.1)

25.0 (77.0)

425 (0.94)

30.2 (86.4)

27.8 (82.0)

25.7 (78.3)

24.0 (75.2)

590 (1.30)

29.0 (84.2)

26.8 (80.2)

24.8 (76.6)

23.0 (73.4)

790 (1.74)

27.7 (81.9)

25.5 (77.9)

23.6 (74.5)

21.9 (71.4)

1015 (2.24)

26.9 (80.4)

24.7 (76.5)

22.7 (72.9)

21.3 (70.3)

1260 (2.78)

25.7 (78.3)

23.5 (74.3)

21.7 (71.1)

20.2 (68.4)

>1530 (3.37)

24.8 (76.6)

22.7 (72.9)

20.7 (69.3)

19.3 (66.7)

Temperature calculations based on a formula from Dr. Malcolm Mitchell (Scotland's Rural College).
This table provides general guidance; however, individual climatic conditions should be considered.
Recent research suggests that RH is less critical for body weights between 200 g (0.441 lb) and 2,500 g (5.51 lb).
Further studies are underway to assess RH effects at both lower and higher body weights.
+

Typical Lighting Program
A Guide to Typical Lighting Program
Age (days)
First Day

Day 2–7
After Day 7

Pre-catching

Lighting Program

Notes

23 hours of light, minimum 30–40 lux (2.8–3.7 fc).

Ensure this program is followed immediately
after placement.

1 hour of dark, <0.4 lux (0.04 fc).

Light must be uniformly distributed throughout
the brooding area.

Gradually increase dark hours to 4–6 hours by day 7.

Adjust light and dark hours incrementally each day
to avoid stress.

Minimum of 4 hours of continuous darkness.
Light intensity of 5–10 lux (0.46–0.93 fc) during the
light period.

Prefer to have the lights turning on at the same time
each day.

23 hours of light for at least 3 days before catching.

For thinning, adjust the schedule to a regular
program.

Light intensity: minimum 5–10 lux (0.46–0.93 fc).

Use brighter lights to encourage bird movement
after thinning.

Local laws and regulations for light intensity should be adhered to.

122

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Appendix 3: Conversion Tables
Length
1 meter (m)

= 3.281 feet (ft)

1 foot (ft)

= 0.305 meter (m)

1 centimeter (cm)

= 0.394 inch (in)

1 inch (in)

= 2.54 centimeters (cm)

Area
1 square meter (m2)

= 10.76 square feet (ft2)

1 square foot (ft2)

= 0.093 square meter (m2)

Volume
1 liter (L)

= 0.22 gallon (gal) or 0.264 US gallons (gal US)

1 imperial gallon (gal)

= 4.54 liters (L)

1 US gallon (gal US)

= 3.79 liters (L)

1 imperial gallon (gal)

= 1.2 US gallons (gal US)

1 cubic meter (m3)

= 35.31 cubic feet (ft3)

1 cubic foot (ft3)

= 0.028 cubic meter (m3)

Weight
1 kilogram (kg)

= 2.205 pounds (lb)

1 pound (lb)

= 0.454 kilogram (kg)

1 gram (g)

= 0.035 ounce (oz)

1 ounce (oz)

= 28.35 grams (g)

1 cubic meter (m3)

= 35.31 cubic feet (ft3)

1 cubic foot (ft3)

= 0.028 cubic meter (m3)

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

123

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Temperature

Temperature Conversion Chart

Temperature (°C)

= (Temperature °F - 32) ÷ 1.8

°C

°F

Temperature (°F)

= 32 + (1.8 x Temperature °C)

0

32.0

2

35.6

4

39.2

6

42.8

8

46.4

10

50.0

12

53.6

14

57.2

16

60.8

18

64.4

20

68.0

22

71.6

24

75.2

26

78.8

28

82.4

30

86.0

32

89.6

34

93.2

36

96.8

= 104 Newtons per square meter (N/m )
or Pascals (Pa)

38

100.4

= 100 kilopascals (kPa)

40

104.0

Energy
1 calorie (cal)

= 4.184 Joules (J)

1 Joule (J)

= 0.239 calories (cal)

1 kilocalorie per kilogram (kcal/kg)

= 4.184 Megajoules per kilogram (MJ/kg)

1 Megajoule per kilogram (MJ/kg)

= 108 calories per pound (cal/lb)

1 Joule (J)

= 0.735 foot-pound (ft-lb)

1 foot-pound (ft-lb)

= 1.36 Joules (J)

1 Joule (J)

= 0.00095 British thermal unit (BTU)

1 British thermal unit (BTU)

= 1,055 Joules (J)

1 kilowatt hour (kW-h)

= 3,412.1 British thermal unit (BTU)

1 British thermal unit (BTU)

= 0.00029 kilowatt hour (kW-h)

Pressure

1 pound per square inch (psi)

= 6,895 Newtons per square meter (N/m2)
or Pascals (Pa)
= 0.06895 bar
= 14.504 pounds per square inch (psi)

1 bar

1 Newton per square meter (N/m2)
or Pascal (Pa)

2

= 0.000145 pound per square inch (lb/in2)

Stocking Density
1 square foot per bird (ft2/bird)

= 10.76 birds per square meter (bird/m2)

10 birds per square meter (bird/m2)

= 1.08 square feet per bird (ft2/bird)

1 kilogram per square meter (kg/m2)

= 0.205 pound per square foot (lb/ft2)

1 pound per square foot (lb/ft2)

= 4.88 kilograms per square meter (kg/m2)

124

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Operating Temperature
Operating temperature is defined as the minimum house temperature plus ⅔ the difference between minimum and
maximum house temperatures. It is important where there are significant diurnal temperature fluctuations.
For example, minimum house temperature = 16oC (60.8oF) and maximum house temperature = 28oC (82.4oF).
Ventilation
1 cubic foot per minute (ft3/min)

= 1.699 cubic meters per hour (m3/hr)

1 cubic meter per hour (m3/hr)

= 0.589 cubic feet per minute (ft3/min)

Insulation
The R-value rates the insulative properties of building materials; the higher the R-value, the better the insulation.
It is measured in square meter-Kelvin per Watt (m2K/W) or square foot-degree Fahrenheit-hour per/British thermal unit
(ft²·°F·hr/BTU).
The U-value is the inverse of the R-value and describes how well a building material conducts heat. The lower the
U-value, the better the insulation. It is measured in Watts per meter squared Kelvin (W/m2·K) or British thermal units
per hour degree Fahrenheit square foot (BTU/hr/°F/ft2).
Insulation
1 square foot-degree Fahrenheit-hour
per British thermal unit (ft²·°F·hr/BTU)

= 0.176 square meter-Kelvin per Watt (m2·K/W)

1 square meter-Kelvin per Watt (m2·K/W)

= 5.678 square foot-degree Fahrenheit-hour/British thermal units (ft2·°F·hr/BTU)

Light
1 foot candle (fc)

= 10.76 lux

1 lux

= 0.093 foot candle (fc)

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

125

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Appendix 4: Key Performance Parameters
Production Efficiency Factor (PEF)+
PEF=

Livability (%) x Live Weight (kg)
Age (days x FCR)

Coefficient of Variation % (CV%)

For example, age 35 days, live weight 2.296 kg, livability
97.20%, FCR 1.399.
97.20 x 2.296

PEF=
    

Average Body Weight

250 g (0.55 lb)

CV% =

2,550 g (5.62 lb)

= 456

For example, age 45 days, live weight 3.295 kg, livability
96.55%, FCR 1.606.

x100

For example, a flock has an average body weight of
2,550 g (5.62 lb) and a standard deviation around that
average weight of 250 g (0.55 lb).

x100

35 x 1.399

Standard Deviation

CV% =

x100

    

x100

= 9.8

Notes
96.55 x 3.295

PEF=
    

x100

45 x 1.606

= 440

The lower the CV%, the more uniform and less variable the
flock is. CV% is an important tool for estimating the flock's
live weight. Please refer to the Monitoring Live Weight and
Uniformity of Performance section in this handbook for
more information.

Feed Conversion Ratio (FCR)

Notes

The higher the value, the better the technical performance.
This calculation is heavily biased by daily gain. When
comparing different environments, comparisons should
be made at similar processing ages.
Also referred to as European Production Efficiency Factor
(EPEF).
+

Manual calculation formula:

FCR =

Total Feed Consumed

For example, a sample of 10 birds has a total live weight of
31,480 g (69.34 lb), and they have consumed a total feed
amount of 36,807 g (81.07 lb). The average feed conversion
for this sample set would be calculated as follows:

Where:

FCR =

xi = Value of the ith point in the data set
x̄ = The mean value of the data set

n = The number of data points in the data set

Total Live Weight

    

36,807 g (81.07 lb)
31,480 g (69.34 lb)

= 1.169

Notes
Standard
deviation

126

=

1
(n - 1)

n

∑

(xi - x̄ ) 2

The lower the FCR, the more efficient a bird (or sample of birds)
is at converting the feed consumed into live body weight.

i=1

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Adjusted Feed Conversion Ratio (Adjusted FCR)
Adjusted FCR = Actual FCR +

Target Body Weight – Actual Body Weight
Factor

The factor in the above equation will change depending on the units of measurement used. For an as hatched flock,
a factor of 4.5 kg, 4,500 g, or 10 lb should be used, depending on the unit of measurement. This equation provides
a good estimation of adjusted FCR for broiler performance comparison. However, it is important to note that adjusting
FCR to target weights beyond ±0.5 lb/0.227 kg/227 g of the actual weight can distort the comparison.

Example (Metric, unit in g)
Adjusted FCR = Actual FCR +

Target Body Weight – Actual Body Weight
4,500 g
1,350 g – 1,290 g

Adjusted FCR = 1.215 +

4,500 g

= 1.215 + (60 g/4,500 g)
= 1.215 + 0.013
= 1.228

Example (Metric, unit in kg)
Adjusted FCR = Actual FCR +

= 1.215 +

Target Body Weight – Actual Body Weight
4.5 kg
1.1350 kg – 1.290 kg
4.5 kg

= 1.215 + (0.06 kg/4.5 kg)
= 1.215 + 0.013
= 1.228

Example (Imperial, unit in lb)
Adjusted FCR = Actual FCR +

= 1.215 +

Target Body Weight – Actual Body Weight
10 lb
2.976 lb – 2.844 lb
10 lb

= 1.215 + (0.132 lb/10 lb)
= 1.215 + 0.013
= 1.228

Notes

Adjusted FCR is a useful calculation when you want to measure a flock's performance against a common target weight.
It is also helpful when doing breed comparisons, as the flock can be analyzed at a specific target weight.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

127

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Appendix 5: Feather Sexing
Identification of males and females by feather sexing at day-old may be accomplished easily at the hatchery in progeny
from slow-feathering parent stock. In feather-sexable broilers, fast-feathering chicks are female and slow-feathering
chicks are male. The type of feathering is identified by observing the relationship between coverts (upper layer) and the
primaries (lower layer), which are found on the outer half of the wing.
Coverts (blue) and the primaries (red).

Male broiler chick wing feathers.
In the slow-feathering male chick, the primaries are the same
length or shorter than the coverts; see the figures below.
Primaries shorter than coverts.

Coverts and primaries the same length.

Female broiler chick wing feathers.
In the fast-feathering female chick, the primaries are
longer than the coverts; see the figure below.
Primaries longer than coverts.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

Hatchery How To 11: Feather Sex
Day-old Chicks in the Hatchery

128

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Appendix 6: Problem Solving
Poor Live Performance
Issue

High early mortality
(< 7 days).

Possible Causes

Action

Poor chick quality.

Check hatchery practice, egg handling, and hygiene.

Incorrect brooding.

Reassess brooding practice.

Disease.

Post mortems on dead chicks—take veterinary advice.

Appetite.

Measure and achieve target crop fill levels.
Check feed and water availability, and accessibility.
Check ventilation rates.

Metabolic diseases (ascites,
sudden death syndrome).
High mortality
(post-7 days).

Check feed formulation.
Avoid excessive early growth rates.
Check hatchery ventilation.

Infectious diseases.

Leg problems.

Nutrition.

Establish cause (post-mortem).
Take veterinary advice on medication and vaccination.
Check water consumption.
Check Ca, P, and Vitamin D levels in the diet;
use lighting programs to increase bird activity.
Check starter ration — availability, nutritional and physical quality.
Check water supply — availability and quality.
Investigate any source flock issues.

Chick quality.

Check hatchery procedures — egg hygiene, storage, incubation
conditions, hatch time, transport time, and other environmental
conditions.
Reassess brooding practice.

Poor early growth
and uniformity.

Check temperature and humidity profiles.
Environmental conditions.

Check daylength.
Check the uniformity of light intensity.
Check air quality — CO2, dust, and minimum ventilation rate.

Appetite.

Check for poor stimulation of appetite (e.g., below-target crop fill for
time post-placement).

Downtime between flocks.

Ensure downtime between flocks is >10 days.

Disease.

Seek veterinary advice.
Check feed nutritional and physical quality and formulation.

Low nutrient intake.

Poor late growth
and uniformity.

Infectious disease.

Check feed intake and accessibility.
Avoid excessive early growth restriction and overly restrictive lighting
schedules.
Take veterinary advice on medication and vaccination.
Check ventilation rates.
Check stocking density.

Environmental conditions.

Check house temperatures.
Check water and feed availability.
Check feeder and drinking space.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

129

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Poor Live Performance (Continued)
Issue

Possible Causes
Nutrition.

Action
Improve the quality of fats used in the diet.
Avoid excessive salts and protein in the diet.
Ensure sufficient litter depth at the start.
Select appropriate litter material.

Poor litter quality.

Environment.

Adjust drinker design to prevent spillage.
Maintain effective humidity control and adequate ventilation.
Keep stocking density within recommended levels.
Provide sufficient ventilation and preheating.

Infectious disease.

Maintain proper house temperature to prevent enteritis;
consult a veterinarian if necessary.
See actions listed in poor early growth, poor late growth, and high
mortality.

Poor growth.

Check settings/adjustments of feeders;
Allow birds to clear feeders once per day from 10–12 days old.
Check house temperature is not too low (based on bird behavior).

Poor feed
conversion.

High mortality (especially late
mortality).

Take veterinary advice on medication and vaccination.

Feed wastage.

Check feed formulation and quality.

Environment.

Check downtime between flocks (at least 10 days).
Check that the cleaning and disinfecting process is conducted
effectively.

Environment.

Check that the house temperature is not too high.

Nutrition.

Check the ration for methionine and cystine content and amino
acid balance.

Issue

Characterized by

Actions

Ascites.

Fluid gathering/pooling in the
abdominal cavity.

Poor feather cover.

Processing Rejects

Cellulitis: Yellowing, orange
peel-type skin with underlying
pus plaques.
Skin Lesions
(Cellulitis,
Dermatitis, Breast
Blisters, Hockburn/
Pododermatitis).

Dermatitis: Irritated, red, and/or
inflamed skin.
Breast Blisters: Red/brown
areas of skin that have potentially
penetrated to underlying
musculature.
Hockburn/Pododermatitis:
Brown areas on the feet/hocks
ranging from mild to severe.

130

Clean and disinfect thoroughly between flocks to prevent disease
transmission.
Reduce dust levels and ensure adequate ventilation throughout
each flock's cycle.

Maintain appropriate stocking densities/ feeding space per bird to
prevent scratches and skin lesions from bacterial entry. Lighting
program should ensure that “lights on” coordinates with feed
available in the pans.
Feeder height should be so to encourage feeding but reduce the
likelihood of birds resting at the pans.
Ensure good feather coverage among birds to maintain health
and welfare.
Manage litter quality to avoid burns caused by uric acid in droppings.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Processing Rejects (Continued)
Issue

Characterized by

Contamination.

The crop and/or the gut will still
have feed or digesta remaining at
levels that will cause contamination
issues at processing.

Actions
Adjust feed withdrawal strategy to avoid welfare issues and meat
quality concerns within local laws and regulations.
Avoid extended feed withdrawal, which can lead to welfare issues
and potential meat quality problems.
Ensure access to water up to the point of catching.
Review light program — intensity and timing.

Runts/Stunts,
Emaciated.

Downgrades
(Broken Wings/
Legs, Bruising).

Deep Pectoral
Myopathy (Green
and Fishy Muscle
Disease)

Runts/Stunts: Small undersized
birds in comparison to the rest
of the flock.
Emaciated: Birds that are of a
similar skeletal size to others in
the flock, however, when plucked,
show a loss in muscle (e.g.,
exhibit a protruding breast bone).
Broken Wings/Legs:
Damaged limbs due to handling
issues on-farm, at catching or
during early processing.
Bruising: Areas of bruising on
the bird due to handling issues
on farm and/or at catching.

Green or redder areas at the inner
fillet of the breast that will be seen
post-processing and during the
cutting stage.

Remove runts and stunts that struggle to access feed and water,
preventing size variation and machinery damage during processing.
Identify and remove emaciated birds during routine checks, as they
may have underlying conditions affecting their health.

Assess lesions by bruise color to determine when damage occurred:
Bright red — Fresh
Green — Old
Maintain high welfare standards during handling and catching at all
stages, retraining if required.
Monitor external catchers during depletion to ensure bird welfare is
upheld.
Manage excessive activity in flocks to minimize wing flapping during
the growing period.
Conduct catching under low light levels or using blue lights to keep
the flock calm, especially when thinning is carried out.
Assess lesions by bruise color to determine when damage occurred
(e.g., thinning or another event).
Ensure proper crate stocking density for the time of year, distance to
the processing plant, and the size/type of transport drawer or crate.
Adjust crate stocking density in warmer or colder months to prevent
over or under-stocking.

Dead on Arrival
(DOA).

Birds found dead in the transport
crates/drawers.

Refer to the recommended maximum stocking density for each
transport drawer/crate, considering manufacturer guidelines and
local regulations.
Consider fully enclosed, temperature-controlled trailers for transporting
birds in extreme climates.
Use breathable side curtains for protection in more temperate climates.

For additional guidance on troubleshooting health issues, refer to Tables 7.5 and 7.6 in Health and Biosecurity.

OTHER USEFUL INFORMATION AVAILABLE

A Checklist for Investigating Broiler
Performance Problems

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Broiler Myopathies Handbook

131

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Appendix 7: Ventilation Rates and Calculations
Calculation for Minimum Ventilation Fan Timer Settings
To determine the interval fan timer settings for achieving minimum ventilation, the following steps are employed.
Obtain the guideline for minimum ventilation rate from the Table 6.2, Environmental Requirements section.

Example (Metric)
Assumptions
Bird age = 18 days
Bird weight = 800 g
Number of birds = 30,000
Minimum ventilation fan = 3 (91 cm diameter)
Minimum ventilation rate = 0.731 m3/hr/bird
Minimum ventilation fan capacity = 15,300 m³/hr (at the required operating pressure)
Cycle time = 5 min (300 s)
Step 1: Calculate the total minimum ventilation rate required for the house (m³/hr).
Minimum ventilation requirement = number of birds in the house x ventilation rate per bird.
= 30,000 birds x 0.731 m3/hr/bird
= 21,930 m3/hr

Step 2: Calculate the actual ON time of the fans.
ON time = ventilation required ÷ (minimum ventilation fan capacity x number of fans) x cycle time
ON time = 21,930 m3/hr ÷ (15,300 m3/hr x 3) x 300 s =143 s

So, ON time = 143 s, and OFF time = 300 s – 143 s = 157 s.
Notes
Cycle time = ON time + OFF time.
Regardless of any calculation, the minimum ON time should be long enough for the incoming air to reach the apex of
the ceiling and start to move down toward the floor.
This minimum ON time can be determined by performing a smoke test in the house.
This is purely a theoretical estimation of the minimum ventilation requirement. Actual fan and timer settings MUST be
determined based on actual house conditions, air quality, and bird behavior.

132

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Example (Imperial)
Assumptions
Bird age = 18 days
Bird weight = 1.764 lb
Number of birds = 30,000
Minimum ventilation fan = 3 (36 in diameter)
Minimum ventilation rate = 0.430 ft3/min (cfm)
Minimum ventilation fan capacity = 9,000 cfm (at the required operating pressure).
Cycle time = 5 min (300 s)
Step 1: Calculate the total minimum ventilation rate required for the house (cfm).
Minimum ventilation requirement = number of birds in the house x ventilation rate per bird.
= 30,000 birds x 0.430 cfm/bird
= 12,900 cfm

Step 2: Calculate the actual ON time of the fans.
ON time = ventilation required ÷ (minimum ventilation fan capacity x number of fans) x cycle time
ON time = 12,900 cfm ÷ (9,000 cfm x 3) x 300 s = 143 s

So, ON time = 143 s, and OFF time = 300 s – 143 s = 157 s.
Notes
Cycle time = ON time + OFF time.
Regardless of any calculation, the minimum ON time should be long enough for the incoming air to reach the apex of
the ceiling and start to move down toward the floor.
This minimum ON time can be determined by performing a smoke test in the house.
This is purely a theoretical estimation of the minimum ventilation requirement. Actual fan and timer settings MUST be
determined based on actual house conditions, air quality, and bird behavior.

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

133

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Calculation for Tunnel Ventilation
IMPORTANT NOTES: The following is a simplified example calculation of a broiler house. While the calculations
themselves are straightforward, the assumption regarding fan operating pressure depends on several factors, including
house construction, partition fences, design air speed, and the type of cooling pads used. Incorrect assumptions about fan
operating pressure can significantly impact the number of fans required and, ultimately, the actual air speed within the house.
Consult a specialist in the design phase before the construction project starts.
Please note that in the example that follow, metric values have not been precisely converted to imperial units. Conversion values
were rounded to simplify the example, which may lead to slight discrepancies in the number of fans and cooling pad area.

Example Calculation (Metric)
Assumptions:
House width (W) = 12 m
Sidewall height (H) = 2.4 m

R

Roof height (R) = 1.5 m
Design air speed = 3 m/s
(House has an open ceiling structure, not a flat ceiling)

H

Fan operating pressure = 40 Pa
Fan capacity at 40 Pa = 35,000 m³/hr

W

Cooling pad flute angle = 45 x 15
Cooling pad thickness = 150 mm
Design air speed through 45 x 15 cooling pads = 1.78 m/s
Step 1: Calculate the required fan capacity.
Cross-section area:
= 0.5 x W x R + W x H
= 0.5 x 12 m x 1.5 m + 12 m x 2.4 m = 37.8 m²
Required fan capacity:
= design air speed x cross-section area x 3,600
= 3 m/s x 37.8 m² x 3,600 = 408,240 m³/hr

Note: Cross-section area is the area of the house through which the air flows; 3,600 converts seconds to hours.
Step 2: Calculate the number of fans required.
Number of fans:
= required fan capacity ÷ capacity per fan at assumed pressure
= 408,240 m³/hr ÷ 35,000 m³/hr = 11.7 fans
Suggestion — use 12 fans
Total operating fan capacity:
= 12 x 35,000 m³/hr = 420,000 m³/hr

Step 3: Calculate the cooling pad area.
Cooling pad area:
= total operating fan capacity ÷ design air speed through cooling pads ÷ 3,600
= 420,000 m³/hr ÷ 1.78 m/s ÷ 3,600 = 65.5 m²

134

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Example Calculation (Imperial)
Assumptions:
House width (W) = 39.3 ft
Sidewall height (H) = 7.9 ft

R

Roof height (R) = 4.9 ft
Design air speed = 600 fpm

H

(House has an open ceiling structure, not a flat ceiling)
Design air speed = 600 fpm
Fan operating pressure = 0.16 in WC
(inches water column)

W

Fan capacity at 0.16 in WC = 20,584 cfm
Cooling pad flute angle = 45 x 15
Cooling pad thickness = 6 in
Design air speed through 45 x 15 cooling pads = 350 fpm
Step 1: Calculate the required fan capacity.
Cross-section area:
= 0.5 x W x R + W x H
= 0.5 x 39.3 ft x 4.9 ft + 39.3 ft x 7.9 ft = 406.8 ft²
Required fan capacity:
= design air speed x cross-section area
= 600 fpm x 406.8 ft² = 244,053 cfm

Note: Cross-section area is the area of the house through which the air flows.
Step 2: Calculate the number of fans required.
Number of fans:
= required fan capacity ÷ capacity per fan at assumed pressure
= 244,053 cfm ÷ 20,584 cfm = 11.9 fans
Suggestion — use 12 fans
Total operating fan capacity = 12 x 20,584 cfm = 247,008 cfm

Step 3: Calculate the cooling pad area.
Cooling pad area:
= total operating fan capacity ÷ design air speed through cooling pads
= 247,008 cfm ÷ 350 fpm = 705.7 ft²

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

135

APPENDICES
CONTENTS

Appendix 8: Calculation for Stocking Density
NOTE: 15% of the total floor area is unavailable, generally occupied by equipment, walkways, feeding and watering
systems, and other necessary structures.

Assumptions (Metric):
Building width = 15 m
Building length = 150 m
Total No. of birds = 30,000
Average bird weight = 2.5 kg
Total floor area
= building width x building length
= 15 m x 150 m = 2,250 m2
Available floor space
= total floor area – unavailable area = total floor area – 15% x total floor area
= 2,250 m2 – 15% x 2,250 m2 = 1,912.5 m2
Final total bird weight
= total birds x average bird weight
= 30,000 x 2.5 kg = 75,000 kg
Stocking density
= total bird weight/available floor space
= 75,000 kg/1,912.5 m2 = 39.2 kg/m2

Assumptions (Imperial):
Building width = 49.2 ft
Building length = 492.1 ft
Total No. of birds = 30,000
Average bird weight = 5.51 lb
Total floor area
= building width x building length
= 49.2 ft x 492.1 ft = 24,211.3 ft2
Available floor space
= total floor area – unavailable area = total floor area – 15% x total floor area
= 24,211.3 ft2 – 15% x 24,211.3 ft2 = 20,579,6 ft2
Final total bird weight
= total birds x average bird weight
= 30,000 x 5.51 lb = 165,300 lb
Stocking density
= total bird weight ÷ available floor space
= 165,300 lb ÷ 20,579.6 ft2 = 8.03 lb/ft2

136

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

KEYWORD INDEX
CONTENTS

A

Biofilm.................................................................. 57, 106

Absorbent.................................................................... 98

Biosecurity..................................... 16, 21–23, 29, 63–64,
67, 96, 101–118, 131

Activity/Activities.......... 16–17, 23, 28, 45, 47–48, 51, 65,
78–79, 88–90, 94, 98, 102, 108, 113, 129, 131

Bird sample points........................................................ 38

Additive(s)............................................. 53, 109, 113, 114

Body temperature....................................... 24, 34, 56, 86

Air exchange.................................................... 69, 86, 87

Body weight.......... 16–17, 19, 28, 30, 35, 37–41, 44, 52,
54–55, 65, 78, 90, 102, 122, 126–127

Air flow(s)....................................... 13, 25, 49, 69, 74–76,
78–82, 84–86, 134–135

Breast....................... 14, 52, 55, 60–62, 90, 95, 130–131

Air inlet(s)...................71, 73–76, 78–81, 85, 94, 105–106

Breeder.............................................................. 102, 112

Air leakage........................................................ 65, 71, 72

Broiler production............... 8, 9, 10, 51, 88–89, 119–120

Air pressure............................................................ 12, 72

Brooding..............4, 9, 16–17, 19–21, 24–29, 31–33, 35,
41–42, 57–59, 65–66, 68, 72, 76, 94–95,
115, 120–122, 129

Air quality........................... 13, 19, 31, 33, 35, 69, 70, 72,
77–78, 120, 129, 132–133
Air speed(s)................................... 13, 16, 34, 74–75, 77,
79–82, 85–87, 134–135
Airtight/Airtightness.....................................65, 67, 71-72
Alert/Alertness.......................................... 11, 14, 21, 116

Bulk (bird) weigh/weighing................................ 17, 38, 39
C
Calcium (Ca)................................................. 52, 107, 109

All-in/all-out.................................................... 22–23, 104

Carbon dioxide (CO2)......... 21, 31, 33, 35, 56, 65–66, 68,
74, 77–78, 114, 116, 120, 129

Amino acid (AA)........................................ 51–52, 56, 130

Carbon monoxide (CO)......................... 33, 65–66, 68, 77

Ammonia (NH3)....... 11, 13, 68, 77–78, 98, 107, 114, 120

Carcass...... 8, 9, 42–43, 51, 52, 55, 61, 90, 96, 110, 120

Anticoccidial................................................... 56, 97, 113

Catch/Catching....................... 10, 17, 38–39, 43–48, 56,
89, 91, 116, 119, 122, 131

Antibiotic........................................................... 111, 113

Appetite.................................................... 16, 34, 52, 129

Chick(s)..........7, 9, 10, 16, 19–36, 38, 41, 51–53, 57–59,
61, 65, 75, 85, 89, 93–95, 99, 102–103,
106, 110–112, 115, 119–121, 128–129

Ascites..................................................... 8, 68, 129, 130

Chick management................................................ 19–36

Automated feeding/feeder(s)......................................... 25

Chick placement..... 16, 23–24, 29, 31, 35, 59, 61, 115, 119

Automatic weighing...................................................... 39

Chick quality..................... 7, 9, 20, 21, 41, 115, 119, 129

Antibody/Antibodies............................... 19–20, 111–112

B
Bacteria....................................... 22, 45, 62, 64, 95, 102,
105–111, 113, 116, 130
Bacterial counts.......................................................... 108

Chill/Chilling.............31, 33, 45, 48–49, 69–70, 79, 81–84
Chloride (Cl).......................................................... 52, 109
Chlorine................................................................ 57, 108

Bait/Baiting........................................................... 23, 104

Clean/Cleaning...............6, 14, 16–17, 21–24, 34, 45–46,
57, 64–65, 67, 72, 75, 84–85, 87, 98,
101–108, 110, 112, 114–115, 120, 130

Barrier........................................................ 103, 104, 114

Coccidial........................................ 56, 97, 107, 113, 119

Behavior(s).......... 8–14, 16–17, 19–20, 24, 28–30, 33–34,
42, 45, 59, 61–62, 65, 67, 69, 77–79, 81–83, 87–91,
93–94, 98, 114, 116–117, 120–121, 130, 132–133

Coccidiostat................................................................. 44

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Coefficient of variation (CV).................. 16–17, 35, 37–42,
111, 119, 126

137

KEYWORD INDEX
CONTENTS

Cold...................... 13, 24, 30, 49, 65–66, 69–70, 72, 74,
76, 78–79, 82–83, 95, 117, 131

Distribution................. 11, 13, 16, 29, 33, 35, 40, 54–55,
62, 66, 72, 77-79, 81, 85, 88–89, 114

Coliform(s).......................................................... 108–109

Drinker(s) ...........13, 16-17, 24-27, 29, 40-41, 44-45, 48,
57-60, 72, 78, 89-90, 96, 99, 105-106,
108, 110, 114, 121, 130

Comfort/Comfortable......... 21, 24, 35, 49, 65, 67, 69, 72,
78–79, 81–84, 86–87, 94, 96, 115–116
Competition.................................................................. 62

E

Condemnation(s)........ 43, 48, 61, 81, 102, 116–117, 120

Effective temperature.............................................. 81–82

Condition(s)........ 7, 11–13, 16–17, 19–21, 24–25, 29–30,
33–35, 43, 46, 55–57, 65, 67, 69–70, 72, 76–78,
81–84, 86–87, 93–95, 97, 99, 101–102, 113,
115–116, 120, 122, 129, 131–133

Egg.......................................................... 9–10, 115, 129

Contamination................... 22, 43–45, 56, 59, 62, 95, 98,
102–104, 106, 109–111, 113, 131

Energy...................... 26, 51–52, 54, 56, 65, 92, 115, 124

Egg storage............................................................ 9, 115
Electronic scale...................................................... 38–39

Enteric health.......................................................... 52, 97

Controlled–environment/Closed–environment........ 20, 25,
65, 68, 70–71, 99

Enzyme...................................................................... 112

Convection................................................................... 66

Evaporative cooling................ 49, 69, 82–84, 86–87, 106

Cool/Cooling..........12–13, 20–21, 24, 29, 49, 56–57, 60,
64, 69–70, 78–87, 89, 91–92, 94, 98, 106, 134–135

Evisceration.................................................................. 56

Copper....................................................................... 109
Crate.................................................. 44, 46, 48–49, 131
Crop........................................ 11, 14, 16, 29, 34–35, 44,
113, 115, 119, 129, 131

F
Fans.............................12–13, 31, 49, 66, 68–72, 76–80,
82–85, 87, 105–107, 132–135
Fats.......................................................... 52, 56, 96, 130

Crude protein......................................................... 52, 97

Feather/Feathering........................ 13–14, 42–43, 52, 79,
81–82, 117, 128, 130

Crumble................................. 19, 24, 34, 52–56, 61, 121

Fecal contamination....................................... 43–44, 109

Curtain(s)...........46–47, 49, 68–73, 80, 85, 105–106, 131

Fecal excretion............................................................. 56

D

Feed additives...................................................... 53, 113

Dark.................................. 13, 16–17, 25, 45, 47, 65, 76,
88–90, 94, 107, 115, 120, 122

Feed conversion ratio (FCR)......... 7–9, 12, 42, 55, 89, 91,
94, 102, 119, 126–127

Daylength................................................................... 129

Feed cost..................................................... 8, 52–53, 56

Dead bird disposal...................................................... 110

Feed distribution..................................................... 54, 62

Dead on arrival (DOA)......... 102, 115–117, 119–120, 131

Feed form......................... 35, 53, 56, 119, 121, 129–130

Dehydration.............................................. 21, 29, 59, 115

Feed formulation........................................... 53, 129–130

Depletion................................... 9, 10, 17, 37, 41, 44–45,
57, 61, 89, 120, 131

Feed ingredients....................................... 51–52, 56, 110

Direction plate........................................................ 73, 75

Feed quality........................ 13, 41, 53–55, 115–116, 119

Disease(s).......... 20, 23, 40–41, 52, 64, 68, 96, 101–105,
108, 110–117, 119, 129–131

Feed specification......................................................... 51

138

Feed intake............. 28, 52–54, 56, 89–90, 109, 111, 129

Feed withdrawal................. 17, 43–45, 89, 119–120, 131

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

KEYWORD INDEX
CONTENTS

Feeding space.................................. 44, 61, 99, 121, 130

Heat stress....................................................... 45, 56, 98

Feeding system........................ 19, 24, 51, 57, 61–62, 65
Feet.................................... 14, 21, 35, 58, 123–125, 130

Heat/Heating................12–13, 16, 24–33, 45–46, 48–49,
55–56, 64–70, 72, 74, 77, 79, 81, 86–87, 90, 92,
94, 96–98, 102, 105–107, 113, 117, 125, 130

Female..................................................... 40, 42, 53, 128

Hock.............................................. 14, 96, 105, 115, 130

Fence/Fencing............ 46, 67, 81, 85, 102, 104–105, 134

Holding area................................................................. 49

Filter........................................................................... 110

Holding time................................................................. 49

Fines...................................................................... 53–55
Finish/Finisher (feed)............... 17, 42, 52–53, 55–56, 121

Hot climate/Hot weather................ 20, 24, 49, 56–57, 60,
69, 82–83, 87, 94, 99

Floor temperature............................... 16, 24, 95, 98, 120

House design............................. 63–65, 67, 78, 102, 114

Flow rate.................................................. 57, 59–60, 121

Housing system...................................................... 65, 99

Fluorescent................................................................... 92

Humidity...................... 16, 21, 25, 29–30, 32–33, 49, 63,
67–68, 78, 99, 114, 120, 129–130

Fogger/Fogging.............. 29, 49, 82–83, 85, 87, 106–107
Footpad Dermatitis (FPD)...................... 52, 57, 96–97, 99
Formalin..................................................................... 107
Fumigation........................................................... 23, 107
G
Gases......................................................... 16, 31, 33, 67
Genetic potential........................................................ 7–8
Grower feed..................................................... 17, 52–53
Growth................ 7–9, 12, 17, 19, 29, 37, 39, 42, 51–57,
61, 63, 68, 88–89, 91, 94–95, 102,
109–110, 114, 129–130
H
Handling.............................. 15, 38, 43, 45, 47, 111–112,
115–116, 129, 131

Hygiene.... 21–23, 29, 102, 108, 111, 113–116, 119, 129
I
Immunity.................................................................... 112
Incandescent................................................................ 92
Incinerate/Incineration......................................... 105, 110
Incubation.............................. 9, 19–20, 29, 52, 115, 129
Individual body weight/weigh/weighing....... 17, 35, 39, 41
Injury.......................................................... 13, 38, 40, 47
Inlet/Inlets................................ 12–13, 32, 65, 68, 70–82,
85, 87, 94, 105–106
Insect(s).............................................................. 103, 105
Insulate/Insulation................... 24, 65, 67, 69, 73–74, 125
Intermittent (lighting)............................................. 90, 120

Hard water........................................................... 85, 110

Iron..................................................................... 109–110

Harvest/Harvesting........................................... 45, 47–48

Isolate/Isolation......................................... 8, 64, 102, 108

Hatchery/Hatcheries............ 9–10, 16, 19–21, 29, 35, 91,
103, 113, 115, 128–129

L

Hauling....................................................................... 116
Head............................................ 33, 45–46, 58, 76, 106
Header tanks.............................................................. 106
Health...................7–8, 11–14, 16, 19–20, 22, 45, 52, 55,
57, 60, 63–64, 67–68, 84, 89–91,
96–98, 101–120, 130–131

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

Laboratory analysis/monitoring........................... 112, 119
Leg............... 7, 8, 14, 39, 61–62, 68, 82, 90–91, 98, 129
Light color........................................................ 88, 91–92
Light duration............................................................... 89
Light intensity.................... 16–17, 35, 43, 45–48, 63, 65,
88–91, 93–94, 115, 122, 129

139

KEYWORD INDEX
CONTENTS

Light source..................................................... 89, 93–94
Light/Lighting..................7, 12–13, 16–17, 20, 24–25, 35,
42–49, 54, 57–58, 63–65, 67, 69, 72,
76–77, 82–83, 88–94, 96–97, 106, 110,
114–117, 120, 122, 125, 129–131, 134
Lighting program........ 17, 44, 89–90, 120, 122, 129–130

Moisture.............................13, 29–31, 65–67, 74, 83–84,
86–87, 95–96, 98, 114–115
Mold............................................................................. 95
Monitor/Monitoring...............8, 11–12, 16–17, 24, 29–30,
32–35, 37–42, 44–45, 48, 57, 59–60, 62, 67,
69, 72, 74, 77–79, 81–82, 87, 94, 96, 102,
108, 113, 117, 119–121, 126, 131

Litter.......... 11, 13–14, 16, 19, 22, 24–25, 29, 35, 44, 46,
52, 55, 57–59, 66, 68–70, 72, 74, 78, 80–81, 85,
87, 95–98, 101, 103–107, 112, 114–117, 120, 130

Mortality.................................... 19, 48, 56, 94, 102, 109,
115, 117, 119, 129–130

Litter condition...................................... 13, 55, 72, 81, 97

Multi–age site............................................................... 64

Litter depth..................................................... 24, 96, 130

Musty........................................................................... 13

Litter disposal....................................................... 24, 105
Litter management................................... 22, 95–96, 105

N
Natural ventilation................................................... 68–69

Litter temperature............................... 16, 24, 35, 66, 120

Navel.................................................................... 21, 115

Livability.............................................. 7, 89, 91, 102, 126

Negative pressure..................... 48, 70–72, 74–75, 77, 79

Live weight...................................8–9, 20–21, 29, 37–43,
51, 61, 99, 119, 126

Nipple drinker(s)/line(s).................. 24, 26, 29, 57–59, 121

Lux..................... 16–17, 25, 43, 65, 88, 93–94, 122, 125
M
Magnesium (Mg)................................................... 52, 109
Male............................................. 39–40, 42, 44, 53, 128
Manual weighing..................................................... 38–39
Mash................................................................ 53, 55–56
(Meat) yield........................7–9, 42–44, 51–52, 55–56, 63
Medication(s)...................... 109, 111, 113, 119, 129–130
Metabolic............................................... 52, 56, 116, 129
Methionine.................................................................. 130
Micron(s)............................................................... 85, 110

Nitrate(s)............................................................. 108–109
Nitrogen......................................................... 52, 98, 109
Nutrient density............................................................ 52
Nutrient intake................................................ 52, 54, 129
O
Open–sided/Naturally–ventilated......................... 5, 68, 70
Organic acids............................................................... 55
Organic matter........................................................... 107
Overheating.................................... 29, 45–46, 48–49, 81
Oxidation reduction potential (ORP) ........................... 108
Oxygen (O2).................................................. 31, 106, 108

Migration...................................................................... 81

P

Mineral(s).............. 51–52, 56, 64, 97, 102, 106, 110, 120

Pad cooling...................................................... 83–84, 87

Mini–drinker(s).................................... 24, 26–27, 59, 121

Pan(s)................................. 54, 61–62, 65, 106, 130, 121

Minimum ventilation................. 13, 16, 30–31, 33, 65–66,
70–79, 129, 132–133

Pant/Panting.................13, 33, 45–46, 56, 82–83, 86–87

Mist/Misting................................................ 29, 83, 85, 87

Parasite(s)................................................................... 105

Mixing chicks................................................................ 20

Parent flock(s)......................................................... 20–21

Modules..................................................... 44, 46, 48–49

Particle size.............................................. 53–55, 95, 121

140

Paper................... 17, 19, 24–27, 29, 35, 61–62, 95, 121

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

KEYWORD INDEX
CONTENTS

Pathogen(s)......................... 22, 54, 64, 97–98, 101, 105,
107–108, 111–112, 114
Peat............................................................................. 95
Pellet(s)................................. 13, 52–56, 61, 95, 113, 121
Pen(s)/Penning........................................... 38, 44, 46, 81
Perch............................................................................ 98

Respiration............................................................. 13, 68
Rodents/Rodent............................... 23, 25, 67, 102–104
S
Salmonella........................ 23, 55–56, 108, 111, 113, 120
Salt(s)........................................................... 96, 107, 130

Pest control........................................................ 101, 114

Sample/Sampling.................... 16–17, 34, 37–41, 55, 98,
106, 108, 110, 113, 117, 126

Phosphorus.......................................................... 52, 129

Sawdust....................................................................... 95

Photoperiod................................................................. 89

Scratch/Scratching................. 14, 43, 45, 62, 89, 94, 130

Physical feed quality....................................... 53–55, 119

Sediment.................................................................... 110

Placement................9, 16, 19–21, 23–25, 29, 31, 33–35,
42, 57, 59, 61, 80, 89, 94, 96, 98, 104,
111–112, 115, 117, 119, 122, 129, 137

Sensors........................................................................ 32
Separate–sex growing.............................................. 8, 42

Platform scale......................................................... 39, 41

Shank........................................................................... 47

Pollution..................................................................... 110

Sidewall(s)................................64, 68–72, 74–75, 77–80,
82, 85, 102, 134–135

Post–mortem.............................. 111, 113, 117, 119, 129
Potassium (K)........................................... 52, 56, 91, 109
Power..................................... 22, 64, 68, 70–71, 92, 116
Pre–catch................................................ 43, 45–46, 122
Pre–processing management........................... 17, 43–50
Pressure................ 12, 23–24, 29, 48, 57, 60, 65, 70–72,
74–77, 79, 85, 94, 96, 105, 107,
111, 124, 132, 134–135, 137
R

Single–age site(s).......................................................... 22
Site(s)............22–23, 64–65, 80, 102–103, 105, 108, 111
Sodium (Na)............................................. 52, 56, 92, 109
Space.......................... 14, 24, 27, 35, 44, 60–61, 66, 90,
99, 104, 114–116, 121, 129–130, 136
Spillage........................................ 13, 53, 59, 61–62, 130
Spot brooder/brooding............. 16, 24, 28–29, 32–33, 94
Spray cooling............................................................... 83

Radiant heat........................................................... 27, 66

Starter feed.......................................... 35, 42, 52–53, 61

Raw material.................................................. 95, 97, 113

Standard deviation.......................................... 37, 40, 126

Rear/Rearing.......................................................... 35, 51

Stocking density/densities........... 7–8, 25, 27, 41–43, 65,
67, 69, 81–82, 94, 96, 99, 124, 129–131, 136

Record(s)............................. 6, 12, 14, 16, 35, 38–39, 41,
101, 103, 111–113, 116–117, 119–120
Regulation(s)............................ 17, 20, 43–44, 47–49, 53,
56, 63–65, 68, 89–90, 94, 99,
105, 107, 110–113, 122, 131
Relative humidity (RH).............. 16–17, 19, 21, 24, 28–31,
33–35, 49, 68–69, 72, 74, 77–78,
81, 83–87, 107, 115, 120, 122
Rendering........................................................... 106, 110
Repairs and maintenance........................................... 106

Stockman/Stockmanship................... 7–9, 11–12, 15, 41
Straw............................................................................ 95
Stress................................... 43, 45, 56, 88, 98, 117, 122
Stunted chicks........................................................... 115
Sudden Death Syndrome........................................... 129
T
Target(s)......................... 8, 12, 14, 21, 30, 34–35, 37–38,
40–44, 51–52, 61, 91, 99, 102, 127, 129

Residues................................................................ 44, 53

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

141

KEYWORD INDEX
CONTENTS

Temperature(s)........................... 7, 11, 13, 16–17, 19–21,
24–35, 40, 44–45, 48–49, 56–57, 59–60, 63,
65–72, 76–79, 81–87, 89–92, 95, 98–99, 107,
110, 114–117, 120, 122, 124–125, 129–131
Temperature sensor...................................................... 81
Thermostat................................................................... 70
Thinning........................................... 44–45, 48, 122, 131
Timer(s).......................... 13, 65, 70, 72, 76–78, 132–133
Toxin(s)......................................................... 56, 114, 116
Trace mineral(s)............................................................. 52
Trailer(s).............................................................. 105, 131
Train/Training....................... 9, 15, 38, 45, 47–48, 58, 63,
102, 104, 107, 112, 116, 131

Vitamin(s).......................................... 51–52, 56, 106, 129
Vocalization.............................................. 11, 13, 33, 117
W
Wash/Washing............22–23, 67, 96, 102–103, 105–107
Waste..................................... 16, 23, 31, 33, 53, 62, 105
Waste gases..................................................... 16, 31, 33
Water temperature............................................ 24, 57, 59
Water quality..................... 57, 64, 85, 102, 108–110, 120
Water requirement........................................................ 57
Water storage............................................................... 57
Wavelength................................................. 88–89, 91–92

Transitional ventilation............................. 5, 71, 78–79, 82

Weak chicks............................................................... 115

Transport(s)......................5, 9–10, 20–21, 35, 43–49, 55,
64, 102, 115–116, 129, 131

Weigh/Weighing......................................... 16–17, 37–41

Tube feeder(s)......................................................... 61–62

Weight(s)..............8–9, 12, 14, 16–17, 19–21, 28–30, 35,
37–45, 48, 51–52, 54–55, 57, 61–62, 65,
72, 77–78, 81, 89–91, 98–99, 102, 119,
122–123, 126–127, 132–133, 136

Tunnel ventilation.............. 65, 69, 71–72, 78–85, 87, 134

Weight distribution........................................................ 40

Tray(s)..................................... 24, 26–27, 59, 61–62, 121

U
Ultraviolet light...................................................... 57, 110

Welfare...............7–12, 15, 19–21, 29, 38, 43–45, 51–53,
57, 63, 67, 88–89, 91, 93–94, 98–99, 101,
105, 107, 110–111, 113, 115–116, 130–131

Uniformity.......8–9, 16–17, 19, 24, 29, 35, 37–42, 55, 59,
61–63, 70, 81, 94, 99, 115, 117, 119, 121, 126, 129

Wet litter........... 29, 46, 57, 59, 69, 72, 74, 78, 85, 97–98

V

Whole grain/Whole-grain............................ 44–45, 55–56

Vaccinate/Vaccination...... 7, 13, 16, 20, 22, 97, 101–102,
111–113, 116, 119, 129–130

Whole–house brooding......................... 24, 26, 29, 32–33

Variability............................................................ 8, 40–42

Wheat..................................................................... 44–45

Wind/Winds.... 33, 45, 49, 64, 69–71, 79, 81–84, 97, 107
Wing damage............................................................... 45

Variation(s)................................. 8, 14, 16, 20, 37, 40, 42,
44, 54, 65, 94, 126, 131

Withdrawal period.............................. 17, 43–45, 53, 119

Vehicle(s).......... 20–22, 35, 46, 49, 64, 67, 101, 103, 105

Wood shavings................................................. 26–27, 95

Vent.................................... 14, 16, 20–21, 24, 29, 34–35
Ventilation.................7, 12–13, 16–17, 21, 29–33, 35, 41,
45–46, 48–49, 63–85, 87, 95–96, 98–99, 102,
105–107, 112, 116–117, 125, 129–130, 132–134

Y
Yolk(s)....................................................... 19, 21, 52, 115

Vermin.................................................................. 98, 104
Viral............................................................ 107, 112, 116
Virus(es)........................................ 20, 105, 108, 112–113
Visitor(s).................................... 22–23, 67, 101, 103, 120

142

ROSS BROILER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 2025

www.aviagen.com
Every attempt has been made to ensure the accuracy and relevance of the information presented. However,
Aviagen accepts no liability for the consequences of using the information for the management of chickens.
Aviagen, the Aviagen logo, Ross and the Ross logo are registered trademarks of Aviagen in the US and other countries.
All other trademarks or brands are registered by their respective owners. © 2025 Aviagen.
Privacy Notice: Aviagen collects data to effectively communicate and provide information to you about our products and our business.
This data may include your email address, name, business address and telephone number. To view the full Aviagen privacy notice visit Aviagen.com.
0325-V1

